The Project Gutenberg eBook of Mystics of the Renaissance and their relation to modern thought, including Meister Eckhart, Tauler, Paracelsus, Jacob Boehme, Giordano Bruno, and others
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Mystics of the Renaissance and their relation to modern thought, including Meister Eckhart, Tauler, Paracelsus, Jacob Boehme, Giordano Bruno, and others

Author: Rudolf Steiner

Editor: Max Gysi

Translator: Bertram Keightley

Release date: April 30, 2025 [eBook #75994]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons, 1911

Credits: Richard Illner and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MYSTICS OF THE RENAISSANCE AND THEIR RELATION TO MODERN THOUGHT, INCLUDING MEISTER ECKHART, TAULER, PARACELSUS, JACOB BOEHME, GIORDANO BRUNO, AND OTHERS ***





                            MYSTICS OF THE
                              RENAISSANCE

                                  AND

                   THEIR RELATION TO MODERN THOUGHT

                               INCLUDING

                 MEISTER ECKHART, TAULER, PARACELSUS,
                     JACOB BOEHME, GIORDANO BRUNO,
                              AND OTHERS


                                  BY

                            RUDOLF STEINER
                            Ph.D. (Vienna)


               AUTHORISED TRANSLATION FROM THE GERMAN BY
                   BERTRAM KEIGHTLEY, M.A. (Cantab.)

                    [Illustration: Printer’s Logo]

                          G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS
                          NEW YORK AND LONDON
                        The Knickerbocker Press
                                 1911


                            COPYRIGHT, 1911
                                  BY
                               MAX GYSI

                           MAX GYSI, Editor,
                         “Adyar,” Park Drive,
                             London, N. W.

                   The Knickerbocker Press, New York




                               CONTENTS

                                                        PAGE

    FOREWORD                                              v

    INTRODUCTION                                          1

    MEISTER ECKHART                                      52

    THE FRIENDSHIP OF GOD                                81

    CARDINAL NICHOLAS OF CUSA                           133

    AGRIPPA VON NETTESHEIM AND THEOPHRASTUS PARACELSUS  182

    VALENTINE WEIGEL AND JACOB BOEHME                   223

    GIORDANO BRUNO AND ANGELUS SILESIUS                 246

    AFTERWORD                                           269




                               FOREWORD

The matter which I am laying before the public in this book formed
the content of lectures which I delivered during last winter at the
Theosophical Library in Berlin. I had been requested by Gräfin and
Graf Brockdorff to speak upon Mysticism before an audience for whom
the matters thus dealt with constitute a vital question of the utmost
importance. Ten years earlier I could not have ventured to fulfil such
a request. Not that the realm of ideas, to which I now give expression,
did not even then live actively within me. For these ideas are already
fully contained in my _Philosophy of Freedom_ (Berlin, 1894. Emil
Felber). But to give expression to this world of ideas in such wise
as I do to-day, and to make it the basis of an exposition as is done
on the following pages--to do this requires something quite other than
merely to be immovably convinced of the intellectual truth of these
ideas. It demands an intimate acquaintance with this realm of ideas,
such as only many years of life can give. Only now, after having
enjoyed that intimacy, do I venture to speak in such wise as will be
found in this book.

Any one who does not approach my world of ideas without preconceptions
is sure to discover therein contradiction after contradiction. I have
quite recently (Berlin, 1900. S. Cronbach) dedicated a book upon the
world conceptions of the nineteenth century to that great naturalist,
Ernst Haeckel, and closed it with a defence of his thought-world.
In the following expositions, I speak about the Mystics, from Master
Eckhart to Angelus Silesius, with a full measure of devotion and
acquiescence. Other “contradictions,” which one critic or another may
further count up against me, I shall not mention at all. It does not
surprise me to be condemned from one side as a “Mystic” and from the
other as a “Materialist.” When I find that the Jesuit Father Müller has
solved a difficult chemical problem, and I therefore in this particular
matter agree with him unreservedly, one can hardly condemn me as an
adherent of Jesuitism without being reckoned a fool by those who have
insight.

Whoever goes his own road, as I do, must needs allow many a
misunderstanding about himself to pass. That, however, he can put
up with easily enough. For such misunderstandings are, in the main,
inevitable in his eyes, when he recalls the mental type of those who
misjudge him. I look back, not without humorous feelings, upon many a
“critical” judgment that I have suffered in the course of my literary
career. At the outset, matters went fairly well. I wrote about Goethe
and his philosophy. What I said there appeared to many to be of such
a nature that they could file it in their mental pigeon-holes. This
they did by saying: “A work such as Rudolf Steiner’s _Introduction to
Goethe’s Writings upon Natural Science_ may, without hesitation, be
described as the best that has been written upon this question.”

When, later, I published an independent work, I had already grown
a good bit more stupid. For now a well meaning critic offered the
advice: “Before he goes on reforming further and gives his _Philosophy
of Freedom_ to the world, he should be pressingly advised first to work
himself through to an understanding of these two philosophers [Hume and
Kant].” The critic unfortunately knows only so much as he is himself
able to read in Kant and Hume; practically, therefore, he simply
advises me to learn to see no more in these thinkers than he himself
sees. When I have attained that, he will be satisfied with me. Then
when my _Philosophy and Freedom_ appeared, I was found to be as much in
need of correction as the most ignorant beginner. This I received from
a gentleman who probably nothing else impelled to the writing of books
except that he had not understood innumerable foreign ones. He gravely
informs me that I should have noticed my mistakes if I had “made more
thorough studies in psychology, logic, and the theory of knowledge”;
and he enumerates forthwith the books I ought to read to become as wise
as himself: “Mill, Sigwart, Wundt, Riehl, Paulsen, B. Erdmann.” What
amused me especially was this advice from a man who was so “impressed”
with the way he “understood” Kant that he could not even imagine how
any man could have read Kant and yet judge otherwise than himself. He
therefore indicates to me the exact chapters in question in Kant’s
writings from which I may be able to obtain an understanding of Kant as
deep and as thorough as his own.

I have cited here a couple of typical criticisms of my world of ideas.
Though in themselves unimportant, yet they seem to me to point, as
symptoms, to facts which present themselves to-day as serious obstacles
in the path of any one aiming at literary activity in regard to the
higher problems of knowledge. Thus I must go on my way, indifferent,
whether one man gives me the good advice to read Kant, or another
hunts me as a heretic because I agree with Haeckel. And so I have
also written upon Mysticism, wholly indifferent as to how a faithful
and believing materialist may judge of me. I would only like--so that
printers’ ink may not be wasted wholly without need--to inform any
one who may perchance advise me to read Haeckel’s _Riddle of the
Universe_, that during the last few months I have delivered about
thirty lectures upon the said work.

I hope to have shown in this book that one may be a faithful adherent
of the scientific conception of the world and yet be able to seek out
those paths to the Soul along which Mysticism, rightly understood,
leads. I even go further and say: Only he who knows the Spirit, in
the sense of true Mysticism, can attain a full understanding of the
facts of Nature. But one must not confuse true Mysticism with the
“pseudo-mysticism” of ill-ordered minds. How Mysticism can err, I have
shown in my _Philosophy of Freedom_ (page 131 _et seq._).


                                                    RUDOLF STEINER.

BERLIN, _September, 1901_.




                             INTRODUCTION

There are certain magical formulæ which operate throughout the
centuries of Man’s mental history in ever new ways. In Greece one such
formula was regarded as an oracle of Apollo. It runs: “Know Thyself.”
Such sentences seem to conceal within them an unending life. One comes
upon them when following the most diverse roads in mental life. The
further one advances, the more one penetrates into the knowledge of
things, the deeper appears the significance of these formulæ. In many
a moment of our brooding and thinking, they flash out like lightning,
illuminating our whole inner being. In such moments there quickens
within us a feeling as if we heard the heart-beat of the evolution
of mankind. How close do we not feel ourselves to personalities of
the past, when the feeling comes over us, through one of their winged
words, that they are revealing to us that they, too, had had such
moments!

We feel ourselves then brought into intimate touch with these
personalities. For instance, we learn to know Hegel intimately when,
in the third volume of his _Lectures on the Philosophy of History_ we
come across the words: “Such stuff, one may say, the abstractions that
we contemplate when we allow the philosophers to quarrel and battle in
our study, and make it out to be thus or so--mere verbal abstractions!
No! No! These are deeds of the world-spirit and therefore of destiny.
Therein the Philosophers are nearer to the Master than are those who
feed themselves with the crumbs of the spirit; they read or write the
Cabinet Orders in the original at once; they are constrained to write
them out along with Him. The Philosophers are the Mystæ who, at the
crisis in the inmost shrine, were there and took part.” When Hegel
said this, he had experienced one of those moments just spoken of. He
uttered the phrases when, in the course of his remarks, he had reached
the close of Greek philosophy; and through them he showed that once,
like a gleam of lightning, the meaning of the Neoplatonic philosophy,
of which he was just treating, had flashed upon him. In the instant
of this flash, he had become intimate with minds like Plotinus and
Proklus; and we become intimate with him when we read his words.

We become intimate, too, with that solitary thinker, the Pastor of
Zschopau, M. Valentin Weigel, when we read the opening words of his
little book _Know Thyself_, written in 1578: “We read in the wise men
of old the useful saying, ‘Know Thyself,’ which, though it be right
well used about worldly manners, as thus: ‘regard well thyself, what
thou art, seek in thine own bosom, judge thyself and lay no blame on
others,’ a saying, I repeat, which, though thus used of human life and
manners, may well and appropriately be applied by us to the natural and
supernatural knowing of the whole man; so indeed, that man shall not
only consider himself and thereby remember how he should bear himself
before people, but that he shall also know his own nature, inner and
outer, in spirit and in Nature; whence he cometh and whereof he is
made, to what end he is ordained.” So, from points of view peculiar to
himself, Valentin Weigel attained to insight which in his mind summed
itself up in this oracle of Apollo.

A similar path to insight and a like relation to the saying “Know
Thyself” may be ascribed to a series of deep-natured thinkers,
beginning with Master Eckhart (1250-1327), and ending with Angelus
Silesius (1624-1677), among whom may be found also Valentin Weigel
himself.

All these thinkers have in common a strong sense of the fact that in
man’s knowing of himself there rises a sun which illuminates something
very different from the mere accidental, separated personality of the
beholder. What Spinoza became conscious of in the ethereal heights
of pure thought,--_viz._, that “the human soul possesses an adequate
knowledge of the Eternal and Infinite Being of God,”--that same
consciousness lived in them as immediate feeling; and self-knowledge
was to them the path leading to this Eternal and Infinite Being. It was
clear to them that self-knowledge in its true form enriched man with a
new sense, which unlocked for him a world standing in relation to the
world accessible to him without this new sense as does the world of one
possessing physical sight to that of a blind man.

It would be difficult to find a better description of the import
of this new sense than the one given by J. G. Fichte in his Berlin
Lectures (1813):

“Imagine a world of men born blind, to whom all objects and their
relations are known only through the sense of touch. Go amongst
them and speak to them of colours and other relations, which are
rendered visible only through light. Either you are talking to them of
nothing,--and if they say this, it is the luckier, for thus you will
soon see your mistake, and, if you cannot open their eyes, cease your
useless talking,--or, for some reason or other, they _will_ insist
upon giving some meaning or other to what you say; then they can only
interpret it in relation to what they know by touch. They will seek to
feel, they will imagine they do feel light and colour, and the other
incidents of visibility, they will invent something for themselves,
deceive themselves with something within the world of touch, which
they will call colour. Then they will misunderstand, distort, and
misinterpret it.”

The same thing applies to what the thinkers we are speaking of sought
after. They beheld a new sense opening in self-knowledge, and this
sense yielded, according to their experiences, views of things which
are simply non-existent for one who does not see in self-knowledge
what distinguishes it from all other kinds of knowing. One in whom
this new sense has not been opened, believes that self-knowing, or
self-perception, is the same thing as perception through the outer
senses, or through any other means acting from without. He thinks:
“Knowing is knowing, perceiving is perceiving.” Only in the one case
the object is something lying in the world outside, in the other this
object is his own soul. He finds words merely, or at best, abstract
thoughts, in that which for those who see more deeply is the very
foundation of their inner life; namely, in the proposition: that in
every other kind of knowing or perception we have the object perceived
outside of ourselves, while in self-knowledge or self-perception we
stand within that object; that we see every other object coming to us
already complete and finished off, while in ourselves we, as actors
and creators, are weaving that which we observe within us. This may
appear to be nothing but a merely verbal explanation, perhaps even a
triviality; it may appear, on the other hand, as a higher light which
illuminates every other cognition. One to whom it appears in the first
way, is in the position of a blind man, to whom one says: there is
a glittering object. He hears the words, but for him the glitter is
not there. He might unite in himself the whole sum of knowledge of
his time; but if he does not feel and realise the significance of
self-knowledge, then it is all, in the higher sense, a blind knowledge.

The world, outside of and independent of us, exists for us by
communicating itself to our consciousness. What is thus made known must
needs be expressed in the language peculiar to ourselves. A book, the
contents of which were offered in a language unknown to us, would for
us be without meaning. Similarly, the world would be meaningless for us
did it not speak to us in our own tongue; and the same language which
reaches us from things, we also hear from within ourselves. But in that
case, it is we ourselves who speak. The really important point is that
we should correctly apprehend the transposition which occurs when we
close our perception against external things and listen only to that
which then speaks from within. But to do this needs this new sense. If
it has not been awakened, we believe that in what is thus told us about
ourselves we are hearing only about something external to us; we fancy
that somewhere there is hidden something which is speaking to us in the
same way as external things speak. But if we possess this new sense,
then we know that these perceptions differ essentially from those
relating to external things. Then we realise that this new sense does
not leave what it perceives outside of itself, as the eye leaves the
object it sees; but that it can take up its object wholly into itself,
leaving no remainder. If I see a thing, that thing remains outside
of me; if I perceive myself, then I myself enter into my perception.
Whoever seeks for something more of himself than what is perceived,
shows thereby that for him the real content in the perception has not
come to light. Johannes Tauler (1300-1361), has expressed this truth
in the apt words: “If I were a king and knew it not, then should I be
no king. If I do not shine forth for myself in my own self-perception,
then for myself I do not exist. But if for myself I do shine out,
then I possess myself also in my perception, in my own most deeply
original being. There remains no residue of myself left outside of my
perception.”

J. G. Fichte, in the following words, vigorously points to the
difference between self-perception and every other kind of perception:
“The majority of men could be more easily brought to believe themselves
a lump of lava in the moon than an ‘ego.’ Whoever is not at one with
himself as to this, understands no thorough-going philosophy and
has need of none. Nature, whose machine he is, will guide him in all
the things he has to do without any sort of added help from him. For
philosophising, self-reliance is needed, and this one can only give to
oneself. We ought not to want to see without the eye; but also we ought
not to maintain that it is the eye which sees.”

Thus the perception of oneself is also the awakening of oneself. In
our cognition we combine the being of things with our own being. The
communications, which things make to us in our own language, become
members of our own selves. An object in front of me is not separated
from me, once I have known it. What I am able to receive from it
becomes part and parcel of my own being. If, now, I awaken my own
self, if I become aware of the content of my own inner being, then I
also awaken to a higher mode of being, that which from without I have
made part of my own being. The light that falls upon me at my awakening
falls also upon whatever I have made my own from the things of the
outside world. A light springs up within me and illumines me, and with
me all that I have cognised of the world. Whatever I might know would
remain blind knowledge, did not this light fall upon it. I might search
the world through and through with my perception; still the world would
not be that which in me it must become, unless that perception were
awakened in me to a higher mode of being.

That which I add to things through this awakening is not a new idea, is
not an enrichment of the content of my knowing; it is an uplifting of
the knowledge, of the cognition, to a higher level, where everything is
suffused with a new glory. So long as I do not raise my consciousness
to this level, all knowledge continues to be for me, in the higher
sense, valueless. The things are there without my presence. They have
their being in themselves. What possible meaning could there be in my
linking with their being, which they have outside and apart from me,
another spiritual existence in addition, which repeats the things over
again within me? If only a mere repetition of things were involved, it
would be senseless to carry it out. But, really, a mere repetition is
only involved so long as I have not awakened, along with my own self,
the mental content of these things upon a higher level. When this
occurs, then I have not merely repeated within myself the being of
things, but I have brought it to a new birth on a higher level. With
the awakening of my self, there is accomplished a spiritual re-birth of
the things of the world.

What the things reveal in this re-birth did not previously belong
to them. There, without, stands the tree. I take it up into my
consciousness. I throw my inner light upon that which I have thus
conceived. The tree becomes in me more than it is outside. That in it
which finds entrance through the gate of the senses is taken up into a
conscious content. An ideal replica of the tree is within me, and that
has infinitely more to say about the tree than what the tree itself,
outside, can tell me. Then, for the first time there shines out from
within me, towards the tree, what the tree is. The tree is now no
longer the isolated being that it is out there in space. It becomes
a link in the entire conscious world that lives in me. It links its
content with other ideas that are in me. It becomes a member of the
whole world of ideas that embraces the vegetable kingdom; it takes its
place, further, in the series of all that lives.

Another example: I throw a stone in a horizontal direction away from
me. It moves in a curved line and after some time falls to the ground.
I see it in successive moments of time in different places. Through
observation and reflection I acquire the following: During its motion
the stone is subject to different influences. If it were subject only
to the influence of the impulse which I imparted to it, it would go
on flying for ever in a straight line, without altering its velocity.
But now the earth exerts an influence upon it. It attracts the stone
towards itself. If, instead of throwing the stone, I had simply let it
go, it would have fallen vertically to earth; and its velocity in doing
so would have constantly increased. From the mutual interaction of
these two influences arises that which I actually see.

Let us assume that I could not in thought separate the two influences,
and from this orderly combination put together again in thought what
I see: in that case, the matter would end with the actual happening.
It would be mentally a blind staring at what happened; a perception of
the successive positions which the stone occupies. But in actual fact,
matters do _not_ stop there. The whole occurrence takes place twice.
Once outside, and then my eye sees it; then my mind causes the whole
happening to repeat itself again, in a mental or conscious manner. My
inner sense must be directed upon the mental occurrence, which my eye
does not see, and then it becomes clear to that sense that I, by my own
inner power, awaken that occurrence as a mental one.

Again, another sentence of J. G. Fichte’s may be quoted which brings
this fact clearly before the mind. “Thus the new sense is the sense
for the spirit; that for which there exists only spirit and absolutely
nothing else, and for which also the ‘other,’ the given being, assumes
the form of spirit and transforms itself into spirit, for which
therefore _being_ in its own proper form has actually disappeared....
There has been the faculty of seeing with this sense ever since men
have existed, and all that is great and excellent in the world, which
alone upholds humanity, originates in what has been seen by means of
this sense. It is, however, not the case that this sense has been
perceived or known in its difference and its contrast with that other,
ordinary sense. The impressions of the two senses melted into one
another, life fell apart into these two halves without a bond of union.”

The bond of union is created by the fact that the inner sense grasps
in its spirituality the spiritual element which it awakens in its
intercourse with the outer world. That which we take up into our
consciousness from outside things thereby ceases to appear as a mere
meaningless repetition. It appears as something new over against that
which only external perception can give. The simple occurrence of
throwing the stone, and my perception thereof, appear in a higher
light when I make clear to myself the kind of task which my inner sense
has to perform in regard to the whole thing. In order to fit together
in thought the two influences and their modes of action, an amount of
mental content is needed which I must already have acquired when I
cognise the flying stone. I therefore apply a spiritual content already
stored up within me to something that confronts me in the external
world. And this occurrence in the external world fits itself into the
spiritual content already present. It reveals itself in its own special
individuality as an expression of this content.

Through the understanding of my inner sense, there is thus disclosed
to me the nature of the relation that obtains between the content of
this sense and the things of the external world. Fichte would say that
without the understanding of this sense, the world falls apart for me
into two halves: into things outside of me, and into pictures of these
things within me. The two halves become united when the inner self
understands itself and consequently recognises clearly what sort of
illumination it throws upon things in the cognitive process. And Fichte
could also venture to say that this inner sense sees only Spirit. For
it perceives how the Spirit enlightens the sense-world by making it
part and parcel of the spiritual world. The inner sense causes the
outer sense-world to arise within itself as a spiritual being on a
higher level. An external object is completely known when there is no
part of it which has not thus undergone a spiritual re-birth. Thus
every external object fits itself into a spiritual content, which,
when it has been grasped by the inner sense, shares the destiny of
self-knowledge. The spiritual content, which belongs to an object
through its illumination from within, merges itself wholly, like the
very self, into the world of ideas, leaving no remainder behind.

These developments contain nothing which is susceptible or even in need
of logical proof. They are nothing but the results of inner experience.
Whoever calls into question this content, shows only that he is lacking
in this inner experience. It is impossible to dispute with him; as
little could one discuss colour with a blind man.

It must not, however, be contended that this inner experience is made
possible only through the special endowment of a few chosen people.
It is a common property. Every one can enter upon the path to this
experience who does not of his own will shut himself against it. This
closing up of oneself against it, is, however, common enough. And in
dealing with objections raised in this direction, one always has the
feeling that it is not so much a matter of people being unable to
attain this inner experience, as of their having hopelessly blocked the
entrance to it with all kinds of logical spiders’ webs. It is almost as
if some one looking through a telescope and discovering a new planet
should yet deny its existence because his calculations have shown that
there can be no planet in that position.

But with all this there is still in most people the clearly marked
feeling that all that really lies in the being of things cannot
be completely given in what the outer senses and the analysing
understanding can cognise. They then believe that the remainder so
left over must be just as much in the external world as are the
things of our perceptions themselves. They think that there must be
something which remains unknown to cognition. What they ought to
attain by again perceiving with the inner sense, on a higher plane,
the very object which they have already cognised and grasped with
the understanding,--this they transfer as something inaccessible and
unknown into the external world. Then they talk of the limits of
knowledge which prevent our reaching the “thing-in-itself.” They talk
of the unknown “being” of things. That this very “being” of things
shines out when the inner sense lets its light fall upon the things, is
what they will not recognise. The famous “Ignorabimus” speech of the
scientist, Du Bois-Reymond, in the year 1876, furnished a particularly
blatant example of this error. We are supposed to be able to get
in every direction only so far as to be able to see in all natural
processes the manifestations of “matter.” What “matter” itself is, we
are supposed to be unable to know. Du Bois-Reymond contends that we
shall never succeed in penetrating to wherever it is that “matter”
leads its ghostly life in space. The reason why we cannot get there
lies, however, in the fact that there is nothing whatsoever to be
looked for there. Whoever speaks like Du Bois-Reymond must have a
feeling that the knowledge of Nature yields results which point to a
something further and other which Nature-knowledge itself cannot give.
But he refuses to follow the road,--the road of inner experience,
which leads to this other. Therefore he stands at a complete loss
before the question of “matter” as before a dark riddle. In him who
treads the path of inner experience, objects attain to a new birth;
and that in them which remains unknown to outer experience then shines
forth.

In such wise the inner being of man obtains light not only as regards
itself but also as regards external things. From this point of view an
endless perspective opens out before man’s knowledge. Within him shines
a light whose illumination is not restricted to that which is within
him. It is a sun which lights up all reality at once. Something makes
its appearance in us which links us with the whole world. No longer
are we simply isolated, chance human beings, no longer this or that
individual. The entire world reveals itself in us. It unveils to us
its own coherence; and it unveils to us how we ourselves as individuals
are bound up with it. From out of self-knowledge is born knowledge of
the world. And our own limited individuality merges itself spiritually
into the great interconnected world-whole, because in us something has
come to life that reaches out beyond this individuality, that embraces
along with it everything of which this individuality forms a part.

Thinking which does not block up its own road to inner experience
with logical preconceptions always comes, in the long run, to a
recognition of the entity that rules in us and connects us with the
entire world, because through this entity we overcome the opposition
of “inner” and “outer” in regard to man. Paul Asmus, the keen-sighted
philosopher, who died young, expressed himself as follows about this
position (_cp._ his book _Das Ich und das Ding an Sich_, p. 14 _et
seq._):--“Let us make it clear by an example: imagine a piece of sugar;
it is square, sweet, impenetrable, etc., etc., these are one and all
qualities which we understand; one thing, however, hovers before us
as something totally different, that we do not understand, that is
so different from ourselves that we cannot penetrate into it without
losing ourselves; from the mere surface of which thought starts back
afraid. This one thing is the unknown bearer of all these qualities;
the thing-in-itself, which constitutes the inmost self of the object.
Thus Hegel rightly says that the entire content of our perception is
related as mere accident to this obscure subject, while we, without
penetrating into its depths, merely attach determinations to what it is
in itself,--which ultimately, since we do not know the thing itself,
remain merely subjective and have no objective value. Conceptual
thought, on the other hand, has no such unknowable subject, whose
determinations might be mere accidents, but the objective subject
falls within the concept. If I cognise anything, then it is present
in its entire fulness in my conception; I am at home in the inmost
shrine of its being, not because it has no proper being-in-itself of
its own, but because it compels me to re-think its concept, in virtue
of that necessity of the concept which hovers over us both and appears
subjectively in me and objectively in the concept itself. Through this
re-thinking there reveals itself to us at the same time, as Hegel
says,--just as this is our own subjective activity--the true nature of
the object.” So can speak only a man who is able to illuminate the life
of thought with the light of inner experience.

In my _Philosophy of Freedom_ (Berlin, 1894, Verlag Emil Felber),
starting from other points of view, I have also pointed out the
root-fact of the inner life (p. 46): “It is therefore unquestionable:
in our thinking we hold the world-process by one corner, where we must
be present, if it is to come about at all. And that is just the very
thing we are here concerned with. That is just the reason why things
seem to confront me so mysteriously: that I am so without any share in
their coming into existence. I simply find them there; in thinking,
however, I know how it is done. Hence one can find no more original
starting point for a consideration of the world-process than that of
thought.”

For one who looks thus upon the inner life of man, it is also
obvious what is the meaning of human cognition within the whole
world-process. It is not a mere empty accompaniment to the rest of the
world happenings. It would be such if it represented merely an ideal
repetition of what is outwardly present. But in cognition something
is accomplished which accomplishes itself nowhere in the outer world:
the world-process sets before itself its own spiritual being. The
world-process would be to all eternity a mere half-thing, if it did not
attain to this confrontation. Therewithal man’s inner experience finds
its place in the objective world-process; and without it that process
would be incomplete.

It is apparent that only the life which is ruled by the inner sense,
man’s highest spiritual life in its most proper sense,--it is this life
only which can thus raise man above himself. For only in this life does
the being of things unveil itself before itself. The matter lies quite
differently in regard to the lower perceptive power. For instance,
the eye which meditates the seeing of an object is the theatre of a
process which, in contrast to the inner life, is exactly like any other
external process. My organs are members of the spacial world like other
things, and their perceptions are processes in time like any others.
Further, their being only appears when they are sunk into the inner
life. I thus live a double life; the life of an object among other
objects, which lives within its own embodiment and perceives through
its organs what lies outside this embodiment; and above this life
a higher life, that knows no such inside and outside, that extends,
stretching and bridging over both the outside world and itself. I shall
therefore be forced to say: at one time I am an individual, a limited
“self”; at another time I am a general, universal “Self.” This, too,
Paul Asmus has expressed in excellent words (_cp._ his book: _Die
indogermanischen Religionen in den Hauptpunkten ihrer Entwickelung_, p.
29 of Vol. I.):

“The activity of merging ourselves in something else, is what we
call ‘thinking’; in thinking, the ego has fulfilled its concept, it
has given itself up as a single thing; therefore, in thinking do we
find ourselves in a sphere which is alike for all, for the principle
of separateness which is involved in the relation of our ‘self’ to
that which is other than itself has vanished in the activity of the
self-cancelling of the single ‘self,’ and there remains then only the
‘Self-hood’ common to all.”

Spinoza has exactly the same thing in view when he describes, as the
highest activity of knowing, that which “advances from an adequate
conception of the real nature of some of the attributes of God to an
adequate knowledge of the nature of things.” This advancing is no other
than the illumination of things with the light of inner experience.
Spinoza describes in glowing colours the life in this inner experience:
“The highest virtue of the soul is to know God, or to obtain insight
into things in the third--the highest--mode of knowing. This virtue
is the greater, the more the soul knows things by this method of
knowing; thus he who can grasp things in this mode of knowing attains
the highest human perfection and consequently becomes filled with the
highest joy, accompanied, moreover, by the conceptions of himself and
of virtue. Thus there arises from this mode of knowing the highest
peace of soul that is possible.”

He who knows things in this way, transforms himself within himself;
for his single separated “self” becomes at such moments absorbed
by the universal “Self”; all beings appear not to a single limited
individual in subordinated importance, they appear to “themselves.”
On this level there remains no difference between Plato and me; what
separated us belongs to a lower level of cognition. We are separated
only as individuals; the individual which works within us is one and
the same. But about this fact it is impossible to argue with one who
has no experience of it. He will everlastingly emphasise: Plato and you
are two. That this duality, that all multiplicity, is reborn as unity
in the outbursting life of the highest level of knowledge: that cannot
be proved, that must be experienced. Paradoxical as it may sound, it
is the truth: the idea which Plato conceived and the like idea which
I conceive are not two ideas. It is one and the same idea. And there
are not two ideas: one in Plato’s head and one in mine; but in the
higher sense Plato’s head and mine interpenetrate each other; all heads
interpenetrate which grasp one and the same idea; and this idea is only
once there as a single idea. It is there; and the heads all go to one
and the same place in order to have this idea in them.

The transformation that is brought about in the whole being of man
when he learns to see things thus, is indicated in beautiful words by
the Hindu poem, the Bhagavad-Gîtâ, about which Wilhelm von Humboldt
said that he was thankful to the fate which had allowed him to live
long enough to become acquainted with this work. In this poem, the
inner light declares: “An eternal ray from myself, having attained a
distinct existence in the world of personal life, draws around itself
the five senses and the individual soul, which belong to nature. When
the spirit, shining from above, embodies itself in space and time,
or when it quits embodiment, it seizes upon things and carries them
away with it, as the zephyr seizes the perfumes of the flowers and
bears them away with it. The inner light rules the ear, touch, taste
and smell, as also the emotions: it knits together the link between
itself and the objects of the senses. The ignorant know not when the
inner light shines forth or is extinguished, nor when it is married to
objects; only he who partakes of the inner light can know thereof.”

So strongly does the Bhagavad-Gîtâ insist upon the transformation of
the man, that it says of the wise man that he can no longer err, no
longer sin. If, apparently, he errs or sins, then he must illuminate
his thoughts or his actions with a light wherein that no longer appears
as error or as sin which to the ordinary consciousness appears as such.
“He who has raised himself and whose knowledge is of the purest kind,
he kills not, nor does he stain himself, even though he should have
slain another.” This points only to the same basic mood of the soul
flowing from the highest knowledge, of which Spinoza, after having
described it in his _Ethics_, breaks out into the passionate words:
“Here is concluded that which I aimed to bring forward in regard to the
power of the soul over its affections or in regard to the freedom of
the soul. Hence it is clear how very greatly the wise man is superior
to the ignorant, and how much more powerful than he who is ruled only
by his lusts. For the ignorant is not merely driven hither and thither
by external causes in many ways and never attains to the true peace of
soul, but he also lives in ignorance of himself, of God and of things,
and when his suffering ceases, his existence ceases also; while on the
other hand, the wise man, as such, feels hardly any disturbance in his
spirit and ever enjoys the true peace of the soul. Even if the road
which I have outlined as leading thereto appears very difficult, still
it can be found. And well may it be difficult, because it is so seldom
found. For how could it be possible, if salvation lay close at hand and
could be found without great trouble, that it should be neglected by
almost all? Yet all that is noble is as difficult as it is rare.”

Goethe has indicated in monumental form the point of view of the
highest knowledge in the words: “If I know my relation to myself and
to the outer world, I call it truth. And thus every one can have his
own truth, and yet it is always one and the same.” Each has his own
truth: because each is an individual, separate being, beside and along
with others. These other beings act upon him through his organs. From
the individual standpoint at which he is placed, and according to the
constitution of his power of perception, he builds up his own truth
for himself in intercourse with the things around him. He acquires his
relation to things. If, then, he enters into self-knowledge, if he
learns to know his relation to himself, then his special separate truth
is merged in the universal Truth; and this universal Truth is in all
the same.

The understanding of the raising of the individual, of the single self,
into the Universal Self in the personality, is regarded by deeper
natures as the secret which reveals itself in the inmost heart of man
as the root-mystery of life. And Goethe has found an apt expression for
this: “And so long as thou hast not that, this: Die and Become! Then
thou art but a melancholy guest upon this dark earth.”

Not a mere repetition in thought, but a real part of the world-process,
is that which goes on in man’s inner life. The world would not be what
it is if the factor belonging thereto in the human soul did not play
its part. And if one calls the highest which is attainable by man the
Divine, then one must say that this Divine is not present as something
external, to be repeated pictorially in the human mind, but that this
Divine is awakened in man. Angelus Silesius has found the right words
for this: “I know that without me God can live no instant; if I become
nothing, He must of necessity give up the ghost.” “Without me God
may make no single smallest worm: if I do not sustain it with Him,
then it must straightway perish.” Only he can make such an assertion
who presupposes that in man something comes to light, without which
external being cannot exist. If everything pertaining to the “worm”
were there present without man, then one could not possibly say that it
must perish if man did not sustain it.

The innermost kernel of the world comes to life as spiritual content in
self-knowledge. The experience of self-knowledge means for man working
and weaving within the kernel of the world. He who is permeated with
self-knowledge naturally carries out his own action in the light of
self-knowledge. Human action is--in general--determined by motives.
Robert Hamerling, the poet-philosopher, has rightly said (_Atomistik
des Willens_, p. 213):

“A man can indeed do what he wills--but he cannot will whatever he
pleases, because his will is determined by motives. He cannot will
whatever he pleases? Look again at these words more closely. Is there
any sensible meaning in them? Freedom of the will ought then to consist
in being able to will something without reason, without motive. But
what does willing mean other than the ‘having a reason’ for preferring
to do or endeavour to attain this, rather than that? To will something
without reason, without motive, would mean to will something ‘without
willing it.’ The concept of motive is inseparably bound up with that of
willing. Without a definite motive the will is an empty potentiality:
only through a motive does it become active and real. It is therefore
quite correct that man’s will is in so far not free as its direction is
always determined by the strongest motive.”

For all action that is not accomplished in the light of self-knowledge,
the motive, the reason for action, must needs be felt as a constraint.
But the matter is otherwise when the reason or motive is taken up
into self-knowledge. Then this reason becomes a part of the self.
The willing is no longer determined; it determines itself. The
law-abidingness, the motives of willing, now no longer rule over
the one who wills, but are one and the same with this willing. To
illuminate the laws of one’s action with the light of self-observation
means to overcome all constraint of motive. By so doing, will transfers
itself into the realm of freedom.

It is not all human action which bears the marks of freedom. Only such
action is free action which in its every part is lighted up with the
glow of self-observation. And because self-observation raises the
individual self up to the Universal Self, therefore free action is
that which flows from the Universal Self. The old controversy whether
man’s will is free or subject to a universal law, to an unalterable
necessity, is a problem wrongly stated. All action is bound which is
done by a man as an individual; all action free which is accomplished
after his spiritual re-birth. Man, therefore, is not, in general,
either free or bound. He is both the one and the other. He is bound
before his re-birth; and he can become free through this re-birth. The
individual upward development of man consists in the transformation
of unfree willing into will possessing the character of freedom. The
man who has realised the law-abidingness of his action as his own,
has overcome the constraint of this law-abidingness and therewith of
un-freedom. Freedom is not from the outset a fact of human existence,
but a goal thereof.

With the attainment of free action, man resolves a contradiction
between the world and himself. His own deeds become deeds of universal
being. He feels himself in the fullest harmony with this universal
being. He feels every discord between himself and another as the
outcome of a not yet fully awakened self. But such is the fate of
the self, that only in its separation from the whole can it find its
contact with this whole. Man would not be man if he were not shut off
as an individual self from everything else; but also he is not man in
the highest sense if he does not, as such a shut-off and isolated self,
widen himself out again into the Universal Self. It belongs through
and through to the nature of man that it should overcome an inherent
contradiction which has lain therein from the beginning.

Any one who regards spirit as, in the main, logical understanding,
may well feel his blood run cold at the idea that objects should be
supposed to undergo their re-birth in spirit. He will compare the
fresh, living flower, outside there in its fulness of colour, with the
cold, faded, schematic thought of the flower. He will feel himself
particularly ill at ease with the conception that the man who draws
his motives from the solitude of his own self-consciousness is more
free than the original, naïve personality which acts from its immediate
impulses, from the fulness of its own nature. To one who sees only
one-sided logic, another man who sinks himself into his own inner being
will appear like a mere walking scheme of concepts, like a mere ghost
in contrast with the man who remains in his own natural individuality.

Such objections to the re-birth of things in spirit are especially to
be heard from those whose power of perception fails in the presence of
things with a purely spiritual content; although they are well provided
with healthy organs of sense-perception and with impulses and passions
full of life. As soon as they are called upon to perceive the purely
spiritual, the power to do so fails them; they can deal only with mere
conceptual husks, when even they are not limited to empty words. They
remain, therefore, in what concerns spiritual content, men of “dry,
abstract understanding.” But the man who in things purely spiritual
possesses a gift of perception like that in things of the senses,
finds life assuredly not the poorer when he has enriched it with its
spiritual content. If I look out upon a flower, why should its rich
colours lose aught whatever of their freshness, because not only does
my eye see the colours, but my inner sense also perceives the spiritual
being of the flower? Why should the life of my personality become
poorer, because I do not follow my passions and impulses in spiritual
blindness, but illuminate them throughout with the light of higher
knowledge? Not poorer, but fuller, richer, is that life which is given
back again in the spirit.




                            MEISTER ECKHART

The world of Meister Eckhart’s conceptions is aglow through and through
with the feeling that things become reborn as higher entities in the
spirit of man. Like the greatest Christian theologian of the Middle
Ages, St. Thomas Aquinas, who lived from 1225 till 1274, Meister
Eckhart belonged to the Dominican Order. Eckhart was an unqualified
admirer of St. Thomas; and this will seem the more intelligible when
we fix our gaze upon Eckhart’s whole manner of conceiving things. He
believed himself to be as completely in harmony with the teachings of
the Christian Church as he assumed a like agreement on the part of
St. Thomas. Eckhart had neither the desire to take aught away from the
content of Christianity, nor the wish to add anything to it; but he
desired to bring forward this content anew in his own way. It forms no
part of the spiritual needs of a personality such as he was to set up
new truths of this or the other kind in the place of old ones. Such a
personality has grown completely intertwined with the content which it
has received from tradition; but it craves to give to this content a
new form, a new life.

Eckhart desired, without doubt, to remain an orthodox Christian. The
Christian truths were his own; only he desired to regard these truths
in another way from that, for instance, in which St. Thomas Aquinas had
done. St. Thomas accepted two sources of knowledge: Revelation, in
matters of faith, and Reason, in those of research. Reason recognises
the laws of things, that is, the spiritual in nature. Reason can raise
itself above nature and grasp in the spirit from one side the Divine
Being underlying nature. But it does not attain in this way to merging
itself in the full being of God. A still higher truth-content must come
to meet it. That is given in the Holy Scripture, which reveals what man
cannot attain to through himself. The truth-content of the Scripture
must be accepted by man; Reason can defend it, Reason can seek to
understand it as well as possible through its powers of knowing; but
never can Reason engender that truth from within the spirit of man. Not
what the spirit perceives is the highest truth, but what has come to
this spirit from without.

St. Augustine declares himself unable to find within himself the source
for that which he should believe. He says: “I would not believe in the
Gospel, did not the authority of the Catholic Church move me thereto.”
That is in the same spirit as the Evangelist, who points to the
external testimony: “That ... which we have heard, which we have seen
with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled,
of the Word of Life; ... that which we have seen and heard declare
we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us.” But Meister
Eckhart would rather impress upon man the words of Christ: “It is
expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter
will not come unto you”; and he explains these words by saying:
“Just as if he had said: Ye have set too much joy upon my present
appearance, therefore the full joy of the Holy Ghost cannot come to
you.”

Eckhart thinks that he is speaking of no God other than that God of
whom Augustine, and the Evangelist, and Thomas, speak, and yet this
testimony as to God is not his testimony, their witness is not his.
“Some people want to see God with the same eyes they see a cow withal,
and want to love God as they would love a cow. So they love God for the
sake of outer riches and inner comfort; but such folk do not rightly
love God.... Simple folk fancy they should behold God as though He
stood there and they here. But it is not so. God and I are one in
the act of knowing (_im Erkennen_).” What underlies such expressions
in Eckhart’s mouth is nothing else than the experience of the inner
sense; and this experience shows him things in a higher light. He
therefore believes himself to have no need of an external light in
order to attain to the highest insight: “A Master says: God became man,
whereby the whole human race is uplifted and made worthy. Thereof may
we be glad that Christ our brother of His own strength rose above all
the choirs of angels and sitteth at the right hand of the Father. That
Master spake well; but, in truth, I would give little for it. What
would it help me, had I a brother who was a rich man, and I therewithal
a poor man? What would it help me, had I a brother who was a wise man,
and I were a fool?... The Heavenly Father begetteth His Only-Begotten
Son in Himself and in me. Wherefore in Himself and in me? I am one
with Him; and He has no power to shut me out. In the self-same work,
the Holy Ghost receives its being and proceeds from me, as from God.
Wherefore? I am in God, and if the Holy Ghost takes not its being from
me, neither does it take it from God. In no wise am I shut out.”

When Eckhart recalls the saying of St. Paul: “Put ye on Jesus Christ,”
he means to imply in this saying the meaning: Sink yourselves into
yourselves, dive down into self-contemplation: and from out the depths
of your being, God will shine forth to meet you; He illumines all
things for you; you have found Him within you; you have become united
with God’s Being. “God became man, that I might become God.”

In his booklet upon _Loneliness_, Eckhart expresses himself as follows
upon the relation of the outer perception to the inner: “Here thou
must know that the Masters say that in every man there are two kinds
of man: the one is called the outer man, and yet he acts through the
power of the soul. The other man is called the inner man, that is, that
which is within the man. Now thou must know that every man who loveth
God maketh no more use of the powers of the soul in the outer man than
so far as the five senses absolutely require; and that which is within
turns not itself to the five senses, save in so far as it is the guide
and conductor of the five senses, and shepherds them, so that they
follow not after their craving to bestiality.” One who speaks in such
wise of the inner man can no longer direct his gaze upon a Being of
things lying outside himself; for he sees clearly that from no kind or
species of the outer world can this Being come to him.

An objector might urge: What can it matter to the things of the outer
world, what you add to them out of your own mind? Do but rely upon your
own senses. They alone give you information of the outer world. Do not
adulterate, by a mental addition, what your senses give you in purity,
without admixture, as the image of the outer world. Your eye tells
you what colour is; what your mind knows about colour, of that there
is nothing whatever in colour itself. To this, from Meister Eckhart’s
standpoint, the answer would have to be: The senses are a physical
apparatus; therefore what they have to tell us about objects can
concern only that which is physical in the objects. And this physical
factor in the objects communicates itself to me in such wise that in
myself a physical process is set going.

Colour, as a physical process of the outer world, sets up a physical
process in my eye and brain. Thereby I perceive colour. But in this
manner I can perceive of colour only so much as is physical, sensuous.
Sense-perception cuts out everything non-sensuous from objects. Objects
are thus by sense-perception stripped of everything about them which is
non-sensuous. If I then advance to the spiritual, the ideal content,
I in fact only reinstate in the objects what sense-perception has
shut out therefrom. Thus sense-perception does not exhibit to me the
deepest Being of objects, it rather separates me from that being. But
the spiritual, the ideal conception, seizing upon them again, unites me
with that being. It shows me that objects are inwardly of exactly the
same spiritual (_geistigen_) nature as I myself.

The barrier between myself and the outer world falls through this
spiritual conception of things. I am separated from the external world
in so far as I am a thing of the senses among other things of the
senses. Colour and my eye are two different entities. My brain and a
plant are two different things. But the ideal content of the plant and
of colour belong together with the ideal content of my brain and eye
alike to a single ideal entity.

This way of looking at things must not be confused with the very
widespread anthropomorphising conception of the world, which imagines
that it grasps the objects of the outer world by ascribing to them
qualities of a physical nature, which are supposed to resemble the
qualities of the human soul. This view asserts: When we meet another
human being, we perceive in him only sensuous characteristics. I
cannot see into my fellow-man’s inner life. I infer from what I see and
hear of him, his inner life, his soul. Thus the soul is never anything
which I can directly perceive; I perceive a soul only within myself.
My thoughts, my imaginations, my feelings, no man sees. Now just as I
have such an inner life, alongside of the life which can be outwardly
perceived, so, too, all other beings must have such an inner life.

Thus concludes one who occupies the standpoint of the anthropomorphising
conception of the world. What I perceive externally in the plant, must
equally be the outer side of something inward, of a soul, which I must
add in my imagination to what I actually perceive. And since for me
there exists but one single inner world, namely, my own, therefore I
can conceive of the inner world of other beings only as resembling my
own inner world. Along this line of argument one comes to a sort of
universal ensouling of all nature (Pan-psychism).

This view depends, however, on a failure to recognise what the awakened
inner sense really gives us. The spiritual (_geistig_) content of an
external object, which reveals itself to me in my inner self, is not
anything added in or by thought to the outer perception. It is just as
little this as is the spirit of another man. I perceive this spiritual
content through the inner sense just in the same way as I perceive its
physical content through the external senses. And what I call my inner
life in the above sense (_i.e._, thoughts, feelings, etc.), is not at
all in the higher sense, my spirit (_Geist_). This so-called inner
life is only the outcome of purely sensuous processes, and belongs to
me only as a purely individual personality, which is nothing more than
the result of its physical organisation. If I transfer this inner life
to outer things, I am, as a matter of fact, thinking in the air.

My personal soul-life, my thoughts, memories, and feelings, are in me,
because I am a nature-being organised in such and such a way, with a
perfectly definite sense-apparatus, with a perfectly definite nervous
system. I have no right to transfer this my human soul to other things.
I should only be entitled to do so if I happened to find anywhere a
similarly organised nervous system. But my individual soul is not
the highest spiritual element in me. This highest spiritual element
must first be awakened through the inner sense; and this awakened
spiritual element in me is also one and the same with the spiritual
element in all things. The plant appears immediately in its own proper
spirituality to this spiritual element,--I have no need to endow it
with a spirituality like unto my own.

All talk about the unknown “thing-in-itself” loses any kind of
meaning with this conception of the world; for it is just that very
“thing-in-itself” which reveals itself to the inner sense. All such
talk originates simply in the fact that those who talk thus are unable
to recognise in the spiritual contents of their own inner being the
“things-in-themselves.” They think that they know in their own inner
selves mere shadows and schemes without being,--“mere concepts and
ideas” of things. But as they still have a sort of premonition of the
“thing-in-itself,” they therefore believe that this “thing-in-itself”
is concealing itself, and that there are limits set to man’s power of
knowing. One cannot prove to such as are entangled in this belief,
that they must grasp the “thing-in-itself” in their own inner being,
for even if one were to put it before them, they would still never
recognise or admit this “thing-in-itself.” But it is just this
recognition with which we are concerned.

All that Meister Eckhart says is saturated with this recognition.
“Of this take a comparison: A door opens and shuts upon a hinge. If,
now, I compare the outer plank of this door to the outer man, I must
then compare the hinge to the inner man. Now, when the door opens and
shuts, the outer plank moves to and fro, while yet the hinge remains
constantly immovable and is in no way changed thereby. In like manner
it is here also.” As an individual sense-being, I can investigate
things in all directions--the door opens and shuts,--if I do not
spiritually give birth within me to the perceptions of the senses, then
do I know nothing of their nature--the hinge does not move!

The illumination brought about through the inner sense is, according
to Eckhart’s view, the entrance of God into the soul. The light of
knowledge which flames up through this entrance, he calls the “little
spark of the soul.” The point in man’s inner being at which this
“spark” flames up is “so pure, so lofty, and so noble in itself, that
no creature can be therein, but only God alone dwells therein with His
purely Divine Nature.” Whosoever has kindled this “spark” in himself,
no longer sees only as sees the ordinary man with his outer senses,
and with his logical understanding which orders and classifies the
impressions of the senses, but he sees how things are in themselves.
The outer senses and the classifying understanding separate the
individual man from other things; they make of him an individual
in space and time, who also perceives the other things in space
and time. The man illuminated by the “spark” ceases to be a single
separated being. He annihilates his separateness. All that brings
about the difference between himself and things ceases to be. That
he, as a single being, is that which perceives, no longer comes into
consideration. Things and he himself are no longer separated. Things,
and with them, God, see themselves in him. “This spark is in very deed
God, in that it is a single oneness and bears within it the imagery of
all creatures, image without image, and image upon image.”

Eckhart proclaims in the most magnificent words the extinction of the
isolated being: “It is therefore to be known, that according to things
it is one and the same to know God and to be known by God. Therein do
we know God and see, that He makes us to see and to know. And as the
air, which enlighteneth, is nothing other than what it enlightens; for
the air giveth light, because it is enlightened; even so do we know
that we are known, and that He maketh us to know Himself.”

On this foundation Meister Eckhart builds up his relation to God. It
is a purely spiritual one, and cannot be modelled according to any
image borrowed from human individual experience. Not as one separated
individual loves another can God love his creation: not as an architect
builds a house can God have created it. All such thoughts vanish before
the inner vision. It belongs to God’s very being that He should love
the world. A God who could love or not love at pleasure, is imagined
according to the likeness of the individual man. “I speak in good truth
and in eternal truth and in everlasting truth, that God must needs ever
pour Himself forth in every man who has reached down to his true root
to the utmost of possibility, so wholly and completely that in His life
and in His being, in His nature and in His Godhead, He keeps nothing
back; He must ever pour all forth in fruitful wise.” And the inner
illumination is something that the soul must necessarily find when it
sinks itself deep into the basis of its being.

From this it is already obvious that God’s communication to humanity
cannot be conceived after the fashion of the revelation of one human
being to another. This communication may also be cut off, for one man
can shut himself off from another; but God _must_, by virtue of His
very nature, reveal Himself. “It is a sure and certain truth, that
it is a necessity for God to seek us, exactly as if His very Godhead
depended upon it. God can as little dispense with us as we with Him.
Even though we turn away from God, yet God can never turn away from
us.” Consequently, man’s relation to God cannot be conceived of as
though something image-like, something taken from the individual human
being, were contained therein.

Eckhart is thus conscious that it belongs to the perfectness of
the Root-Being of the world to find Itself in the human soul. This
Root-Being indeed would be imperfect, incomplete, if it lacked that
part of its unfoldment which comes to light in the soul. What happens
in man belongs to the Root-Being; and if it did not happen, then the
Root-Being would be but a part of Itself. In this sense, man can feel
himself as a necessary part of the Being of the universe. This Eckhart
expresses by describing his feelings towards God as follows: “I thank
not God that He loveth me, for He may not do otherwise; whether He will
it or no, His nature yet compelleth Him.... Therefore will I not pray
to God to give me anything, nor will I praise Him for that which He
hath given me....”

But this relationship of the soul to the Root-Being must not be
conceived of as if the soul in its individual nature were declared
to be identical with this Root-Being. The soul which is entangled in
the sense-world, and so in the finite, has as such not yet got within
itself the content of the Root-Being. The soul must first develop that
content within itself. It must annihilate itself as an isolated being;
and Meister Eckhart most aptly characterises this annihilation as
_Entwerdung_ (un-becoming or involution). “When I come to the root of
the Godhead, none ask me whence I come and where I have been, and none
doth miss me, for here there is an _Entwerdung_.” Again, the following
phrase speaks very clearly about this relation: “I take a cup of water
and lay therein a mirror and set it under the disc of the sun. The sun
casts out its shining light on the mirror and yet doth not pass away.
The reflecting of the mirror in the sun is sun in the sun, and yet the
mirror remains what it is. So is it about God. God is in the soul with
His very nature and being and Godhead, and yet He is not the soul. The
reflecting of the soul in God, is God in God, and yet the soul is still
that which it is.”

The soul which gives itself up to the inner illumination knows in
itself not only what this same soul was before its illumination; but it
also knows that which this soul only became through this illumination.
“We must be united with God in being; we must be united with God
uniquely; we must be united with God wholly. How shall we be united
with God in being? That must happen in the beholding and not in the
_Wesung_. His being may not become our being, but it shall be our
life.” Not an already existent life--a _Wesung_--is to be known in the
logical sense; but the higher knowing--the beholding--shall itself
become life; the spiritual, the ideal must be so felt by the beholder,
as ordinary daily life is felt by individual human nature.

From such starting points, Meister Eckhart also builds up a pure
conception of Freedom. In its ordinary life the soul is not free; for
it is interwoven with the realm of lower causes, and accomplishes that
to which it is impelled by these lower causes. But by “beholding” or
“vision” it is raised out of the domain of these causes, and acts no
longer as a separated individual soul. The root of being is laid bare
in this soul, and that can be moved to action by naught save by itself.
“God does not compel the will; rather He sets the will free, so that
it wills not otherwise than what God Himself wills; and the spirit
desires not to will other than what God wills: and that is not its
un-freedom: it is its true and real freedom. For freedom is that we
are not bound, but free and pure and unmixed, as we were in our first
outpouring, as we were set free in the Holy Ghost.”

It may be said of the illuminated man that he is himself the being
which from within itself determines what is good and what is evil. He
can do naught absolutely, but accomplish the good. For he does not
serve the good, but the good realises and lives itself out in him. “The
righteous man serveth neither God, nor the creature; for he is free,
and the nearer he is to righteousness, the more he is Freedom’s very
self.” What then, for Meister Eckhart, can evil be? It can be only
action under the influence of the lower mode of regarding things;--the
acting of a soul which has not passed through the state of _Entwerdung_
(un-becoming). Such a soul is selfish in the sense that it wills only
itself. It could not bring its willing outwardly into accord with moral
ideals. The soul having vision cannot in this sense be selfish. Even if
it willed itself, it yet could will only the lordship of the ideal; for
it has made itself into this very ideal. It can no longer will the ends
of the lower nature, for it has no longer aught in common with this
lower nature. To act in conformity with moral ideals implies for the
soul which has vision, no compulsion, no deprivation.

“The man who standeth in God’s will and in God’s love, to him it is a
craving to do all good things that God willeth, and leave undone all
evil things that are contrary to God. And it is impossible for him
to leave undone anything that God will have done. Even as walking is
impossible to one whose legs are bound, just so it would be impossible
for a man who standeth in God’s will to do aught unvirtuous.”

Eckhart moreover expressly guards himself against the idea that, with
this view of his, free license is given for anything and everything
that the individual may will. The man possessing vision is indeed
to be recognised by the very fact that as a separated individual he
no longer wills anything. “Certain men say: If I have God and God’s
freedom, then I may just do whatever I please. Such understand wrongly
this saying. So long as thou canst do aught that is contrary to God
and His commandment, so long thou hast not God’s love; even though thou
mayest well deceive the world, as if thou hadst.” Eckhart is convinced
that to the soul which dives down into its own root, the most perfect
morality will shine forth from that root to meet it; that there all
logical conception, and all acting in the ordinary sense, ceases, and
an entirely new ordering of human life makes its appearance.

“For all that the understanding can grasp, and all that desiring can
desire, is verily not God. Where understanding and desiring end, there
it is dark, there shineth God. There that power unfolds in the soul
which is wider than the wide heavens.... The bliss of the righteous
and the bliss of God is one bliss; for there is the righteous full of
bliss, where God is full of bliss.”




                         THE FRIENDSHIP OF GOD

In Johannes Tauler (1300-1361), Heinrich Suso (1295-1365), and Johannes
Ruysbroeck (1293-1381), one makes acquaintance with men whose life and
work exhibit in a very striking manner those “motions of the soul” to
which such a spiritual path as that of Meister Eckhart is calculated to
give rise in natures of depth and power. While Eckhart seems like a man
who, in the blissful experiencing of spiritual re-birth, speaks of the
nature of Knowledge as of a picture which he has succeeded in painting;
these others, followers of his, appear rather like pilgrims, to whom
their inner re-birth has shown a new road which they fain would
tread, but whose goal seems to vanish before them into the illimitable
distance. Eckhart dwells more upon the glories of his picture; they
upon the difficulties of the new path.

To understand the difference between personalities like Eckhart and
Tauler, one must see quite clearly how a man stands towards his higher
cognitions. Man is interwoven with the sense-world and the laws of
nature by which that sense-world is ruled. He is himself a product of
that world. He lives because its forces and its materials are at work
in him; nay, he perceives this sense-world and judges of it by laws,
according to which both he himself and that world are alike built up.
If he turns his eyes upon an object, not only does the object present
itself to him as a complex of interacting forces, ruled by nature’s
laws, but the eye, with which he sees the object is itself a body
built up according to just such laws and of just such forces; and the
seeing, too, takes place by similar laws and forces. If we had reached
the goal of natural science, we should be able to follow out this play
of the forces of nature according to natural laws right up into the
highest regions of thought-formation,--but in the very act of doing
this, we raise ourselves _above_ this play of forces. For do we not
stand above and beyond all the “uniformities which make up the laws of
nature,” when we over-see the whole and recognise how we ourselves fit
into nature? We _see_ with our eyes according to laws of nature. But we
know also the laws, according to which we see.

We can take our stand upon a higher summit and overlook at once
both ourselves and the outer world in their mutual interplay. Is
there not here a something working in us, which is higher than the
sensuous-organic personality working with Nature’s forces and according
to Nature’s laws? In such activity does there still remain any wall
of division between our inner selves and the outer world? That which
here judges and gains for itself insight is no longer our separated
personality; it is rather the general world-being, which has torn down
the barrier between the inner and outer worlds and now embraces both
alike. As true as it is that, judged by the outer appearance, I still
remain the same separated individual when I have thus torn down this
barrier, so true is it also that, judged according to essential being,
I am no longer this separated unit. Henceforth there lives in me the
feeling that there speaks in my soul the All-Being, which embraces both
myself and the entire world.

This is what Tauler felt, when he said: “Man is just as if he were
three men--his animal man as he is according to the senses; then his
rational man and lastly, his highest, godlike man.... The one is the
outer, animal, sensuous man; the other is the inner, understanding man,
with his understanding and reasoning powers; the third man is spirit,
(_Gemüth_--lit. emotional, feeling nature), the very highest part of
the soul.”[1] How far this third man is above the first and second,
Eckhart has expressed in the words: “The eye through which I see God,
that is the same eye with which God sees me. My eye and God’s eye, that
is one eye and one knowing and one feeling.”

  [1] _Cp._ W. Preger: _Geschichte der Deutschen Mystik_, vol. iii, p.
  161.

But in Tauler another feeling is active as well as this. He has
fought his way through to a real vision of the spiritual, and does
not constantly confuse, as do the false materialists and the false
idealists, the sensibly-natural with the spiritual. If, with his
disposition, Tauler had become a scientist, he would have insisted upon
explaining all that is natural, including the _whole_ of man, both the
first and the second, purely upon natural lines. He would never have
transferred purely spiritual forces into nature itself. He would never
have talked of a “purposefulness” in nature conceived of according to
men’s notions. He knew that there, where we perceive with our senses,
no “creative ideas” are to be found. Far rather he was most keenly
conscious of the fact that man is a purely natural being. And as he
felt himself to be, not a scientist, but a devotee of moral life, he
therefore felt most keenly the contrast which reveals itself between
this natural being of man and that vision of God which arises naturally
and within nature, but as spirituality. And just in that very contrast
the meaning of life presented itself to his eyes. Man finds himself
as a single being, a creature of nature. And no science can reveal to
him anything else about this life than that he is such a creature of
nature. As a creature of nature he cannot get outside of the sphere of
natural creation. In it he must remain. And yet his inner life leads
him outside and beyond it. He must have confidence in that which no
science of outer nature can give him or show to him.

If he calls only this nature Being or “that which is,” then he must
be able to reach out to the vision which recognises as the higher,
Non-being, or “that which is not.” Tauler seeks for no God who is
present in the same sense as a natural force; he seeks no God who has
created the world in the sense of human creation. In him lives the
clear insight that the conception of creation even of the Fathers of
the Church is only idealised human creating. It is clear to him that
God is not to be found as nature’s working and her laws are found, by
science. Tauler is well aware that we must not add in thought anything
to nature as God. He knows that whoever thinks God, in his sense, no
longer thinks thought-content, as does one who has grasped nature
in thought. Therefore, Tauler seeks not to think God, but to think
divinely, to think as God thinks. The knowledge of nature is not
_enriched_ by the knowledge of God, but _transformed_. The knower of
God does not know a different thing from the knower of nature, but he
knows in a different way. Not one single letter can the knower of God
add to the knowledge of nature; but through his whole knowing of nature
there shines a new light.

What root-feelings will take possession of a man’s soul who
contemplates the world from this point of view, will depend upon how
he regards that experience of the soul which brings about spiritual
re-birth. Within this experience, man is wholly a natural being, when
he considers himself in his interaction with the rest of nature; and
he is wholly a spiritual being when he considers the conditions into
which this re-birth has brought him. Thus we can say with equal
truth, the inmost depth of the soul is still natural; as also it is
already divine. Tauler emphasised the former in accordance with his own
tendency of thought. However far we may penetrate into our souls, we
still remain separated individual human beings, said he to himself. But
yet in the very depths of the soul of the individual being there gleams
forth the All-Being.

Tauler was dominated by the feeling: Thou canst not free thyself from
separateness, nor purify thyself from it. Therefore the All-Being in
its purity can never make its appearance within thee, it can only shed
its light into the depths of thy soul. Thus in its depths only a mere
reflection, a picture of the All-Being comes into existence. Thou
canst so transform thy separated personality that it reproduces the
All-Being as a picture; but this All-Being itself does not shine forth
in thee. Starting from such conceptions, Tauler came to the idea of
a Godhead that never merges wholly into the human world, never flows
quite completely into it. More, he attaches importance to his not being
confused with those who maintain that man’s inmost being is itself
divine. He says: “The Union with God is taken by foolish men in a
fleshly sense, and they say that they shall be transformed into divine
nature; but such is false and an evil heresy. For even in the very
highest, most inward Union with God, God’s nature and God’s being still
remain lofty, yea, higher than the loftiest; that passeth into a divine
abyss, where never yet was creature.”

Tauler wishes, and rightly, to be called a good Catholic in the sense
of his age and of his priestly calling. He has no desire to oppose
any other conception to Christianity. He desires only to deepen and
spiritualise that Christianity through his way of looking at it. He
speaks as a pious priest of the content of Holy Writ. But this same
scripture still becomes in the world of his conceptions a means for the
expression of the inmost experiences of his soul. “God worketh all his
works in the soul and giveth them to the soul; and the Father begetteth
His only begotten Son in the soul, as truly as He begetteth Him in
eternity, neither more, nor less. What is born when one says: God
begetteth in the soul? Is it a likeness of God, or a picture of God, or
is it somewhat of God? Nay: it is neither picture nor likeness of God,
but the same God and the same Son whom the Father begetteth in eternity
and naught else than the blissful divine word, that is the second
person in the Trinity, Him the Father begetteth in the soul, ... and
thereof the soul hath thus great and special dignity.”[2] The stories
of scripture become for Tauler the garment in which he clothes the
happiness of the inner life. “Herod, who drove out the child and sought
to slay him, is a likeness of the world, which yet seeketh to kill this
child in a believing man, therefore one should and must flee therefrom,
if we do desire to keep that child alive in us, but that child is the
enlightened believing soul of each and every man.”

  [2] _Cp._ Preger: _History of German Mysticism_, vol. iii., p. 219
  _et seq._

As Tauler directs his gaze mainly upon the natural man, he is
comparatively less concerned to tell us what happens when the higher
man enters into the natural man, than to discover the paths which
the lower forces of the personality must follow if they are to be
transmuted into the higher life. As a devotee of the moral life, he
desires to show to men the roads to the All-Being. He has unconditional
faith and trust that the All-Being shines forth in man, if man will
so order his life that there shall be in him a shrine for the Divine.
But this All-Being can never shine forth while man shuts himself up
in his mere natural separated personality. Such a man, separated off
in himself, is merely one member of the world: a single creature, in
Tauler’s language. The more man shuts himself off within this his being
as a member of the world, so much the less can the All-Being find place
in him. “If man is in reality to become one with God, then all energies
and powers even of the inner man must die and become silent. The will
must turn away even from the Good and from all willing, and become void
of willing.” “Man must escape from all his senses and turn inwards all
his powers, and come into a forgetting of all things and of himself.”
“For the true and eternal Word of God is uttered only in the desert,
when the man hath gone out from himself and from all things and is
quite untrammelled, desolate and alone.”

When Tauler stood at his zenith, the problem which occupied the central
point of his mental life was: How can man overcome and kill out in
himself his separated existence, so as to live in perfect unison
with the All-life? For one in this position, all feelings towards
the All-Being concentrate themselves into this one thing: Awe before
the All-Being as that which is inexhaustible, endless. He says to
himself: whatever level thou hast reached, there remain still higher
perspectives, still more exalted possibilities. Thus clear and defined
as is to him the direction in which he has to turn his steps, it is
equally clear to him that he can never speak of a goal: for a new
goal is only the beginning of a new path. Through such a new goal man
reaches a certain level of evolution: but evolution itself continues
illimitably. And what that evolution may attain upon some more distant
level, it can never know upon its present stage. There is no _knowing_
the final goal: only a _trusting_ in the path, in evolution itself.
There is knowing for everything which man has already attained. It
consists in the penetration of an already present object by the powers
of our spirit. For the higher life of man’s inner being, there is no
such knowing. Here the powers of our spirit must first transfer the
object itself into the realm of the existent; they must first create
for it an existence, constituted as is natural existence.

Natural Science follows the evolution of beings from the simplest up
to the most perfected, to man himself. This evolution lies before us
as already completed. We know it, by penetrating it with the powers
of our spirit. When evolution has reached humanity, man then finds
nothing further there before him as its continuation. He himself
accomplishes the further unfoldment. Henceforward he _lives_ what for
earlier stages he only _knows_. He creates, according to the object,
that which, for what has gone before, he only copies in accordance
with its spiritual nature. That truth is not one with the existent in
nature, but naturally embraces both the existent and the non-existent:
of this truth Tauler is filled to overflowing in all his feelings. It
has been handed down to us that Tauler was led to this fulfilling by an
illuminated layman, a “Friend of God from the Mountains.”

We have here a mysterious story. As to where this “Friend of God”
lived there exist only conjectures; as to who he was, not even these.
He seems to have heard much of Tauler’s way of preaching, and to have
resolved accordingly to journey to Tauler, who was then working as
a preacher in Strassburg, in order to fulfil a certain duty by him.
Tauler’s relation to the Friend of God, and the influence which the
latter exercised upon the former, are to be found described in a text
which is printed along with the oldest editions of Tauler’s sermons
under the title, “The Book of the Master.” Therein a Friend of God,
in whom some seek to recognise the same who came into relations with
Tauler, gives an account of a “Master,” whom some assert to be Tauler
himself. He relates how a transformation, a spiritual re-birth, was
brought about in a certain “Master” and how the latter, when he felt
his death drawing near, called his friend to him and begged him to
write the story of his “enlightenment,” but yet to take care that no
one should ever learn of whom the book speaks. He asks this on the
ground that all the knowledge that proceeds from him is yet not really
from him. “For know ye that God hath brought all to pass through me,
poor worm, and that what it is, is not mine, it is of God.”

A learned controversy which has connected itself with the occurrence
is not of the very smallest importance for the essence of the matter.
An effort was made to prove on one side[3] that the Friend of God
never existed, but that his existence was fiction and that the books
ascribed to him come from another hand (Rulman Merswin). On the other
hand Wilhelm Preger has sought with many arguments (in his _History of
German Mysticism_) to support the existence, the genuineness of the
writings, and the correctness of the facts that relate to Tauler.

  [3] Denifle: _Die Dichtungen des Gottesfreundes im Oberlande_.

I am here under no obligation to throw light by presumptuous
investigation upon a relationship as to which any one, who understands
how to read the writings[4] in question, will know that it should
remain a secret.

  [4] The writings in question are, among others: _Von eime
  eigenwilligen weltwisen manne, der von eime heiligen weltpriestere
  gewiset wart uffe demuetige gehorsamme_, 1338; _Das Buch von den
  zwei Mannen_; _Der gefangene Ritter_, 1349; _Die geistliche stege_,
  1350; _Von der geistlichen Leiter_, 1357; _Das Meisterbuch_, 1369;
  _Geschichte von zwei fünfzehnjährigen Knaben_.

If one says of Tauler, that at a certain stage of his life a
transformation took place in him, that will be amply sufficient.
Tauler’s personality need no longer be in any way considered in this
connection, but only a personality “in general.” As regards Tauler,
we are only concerned with the fact that we must understand his
transformation from the point of view set forth in what follows. If
we compare his later activity with his earlier, the fact of this
transformation is obvious without further search. I will leave aside
all outer circumstances and relate the inner occurrences in the soul of
the “Master” under “the influence of the layman.” What my reader will
understand by the “layman” and the “Master” depends entirely upon his
own mentality; what I myself think about it is a matter as to which I
cannot know for whom it is of any weight.

A Master is instructing his disciples as to the relationship of the
soul to the All-Being of things. He speaks of the fact that when man
plunges into the abysmal depths of his soul, he no longer feels the
natural, limited forces of the separated personality working within
him. Therein the separated man no longer speaks, therein speaks God.
There man does not see God, or the world; there God sees Himself. Man
has become one with God. But the Master knows that this teaching
has not yet awakened to full life in him. He thinks it with his
understanding: but he does not yet live in it with every fibre of his
personality. He is thus teaching about a state of things which he has
not yet completely lived through in himself. The description of the
condition corresponds to the truth; yet this truth has no value if it
does not gain life, if it does not bring itself forth in reality as
actually existent.

The “layman” or “Friend of God” hears of the Master and his teachings.
He is no less saturated with the truth which the Master utters than
the Master himself. But he possesses this truth not as a matter of
the understanding; he has it as the whole force of his life. He
knows that when this truth has come to a man from outside, he can
himself give utterance to it, without even in the least living in
accordance with it. But in that case he has nothing other in him than
the natural knowledge of the understanding. He then speaks of this
natural knowledge as if it were the highest, equivalent to the working
of the All-Being. It is not so, because it has not been acquired in a
life that has approached to this knowledge as a transformed, a reborn
life. What one acquires only as a natural man, that remains only
natural,--even when one afterwards expresses in words the fundamental
characteristic of the higher knowledge. Outwards, from within the very
nature itself, must the transformation be accomplished.

Nature, which by living has evolved itself to a certain level, must
evolve further through life; something new must come into existence
through this further evolution. Man must not only look backwards upon
the evolution which already lies behind him--claim as the highest that
which shapes itself according thereto in his spirit--but he must look
forward upon the uncreated: his knowledge must be a beginning of a new
content, not an end to the content of evolution which already lies
before it. Nature advances from the worm to the mammal, from the mammal
to man, not in a conceptual but in an actual, real process. Man has to
repeat this process not in his mind alone. The mental repetition is
only the beginning of a fresh, real evolution, which, however, despite
its being spiritual, is real. Man, then, does not merely know what
nature has produced; he continues nature; he translates his knowledge
into living action. He gives birth within himself to the spirit, and
this spirit advances thence onwards from level to level of evolution,
as nature itself advances. Spirit begins a natural process upon a
higher level.

The talk about the God who contemplates Himself in man’s inner being,
takes on a different character in one who has recognised this. He
attaches little importance to the fact that an insight already attained
has led him into the depths of the All-Being; instead, his spiritual
nature acquires a new character. It unfolds itself further in the
direction determined by the All-Being. Such a man not only looks at
the world differently from one who merely understands: he lives his
life otherwise. He does not talk of the meaning which life already has
through the forces and laws of the world: but he gives anew a fresh
meaning to his life. As little as the fish already has in itself what
makes its appearance on a later level of evolution as the mammal, as
little has the understanding man already in himself what shall be
born from him as the higher man. If the fish could know itself and
the things around it, it would regard the being-a-fish as the meaning
of life. It would say: the All-Being is like the fish: in the fish
the All-Being beholds itself. Thus would the fish speak as long as it
remained constant to its understanding kind of knowledge. In reality it
does not remain constant thereto. It reaches out beyond its knowledge
with its activity. It becomes a reptile and later a mammal. The meaning
which it gives to itself in reality reaches out beyond the meaning
which mere contemplation gives to it.

In man also this must be so. He gives himself a meaning in reality; he
does not halt and stand still at the meaning he already has, which his
contemplation shows him. Knowledge leaps out beyond itself, if only it
understands itself aright. Knowledge cannot deduce the world from a
ready-made God; it can only unfold itself from a germ in the direction
towards a God. The man who has understood this will not regard God as
something that is outside of him; he will deal with God as a being who
wanders with him towards a goal, which at the outset is just as unknown
as the nature of the mammal is unknown to the fish. He does not aim to
be the knower of the hidden, or of the self-revealing existent God, but
to be the friend of the divine doing and working, which is exalted over
both being and non-being.

The layman, who came to the Master, was a “Friend of God” in this
sense, and through him the Master became from a contemplator of the
being of God, one who is “alive in the spirit,” one who not only
contemplated, but lived in the higher sense. The Master now no longer
brought forth concepts and ideas of the understanding from his inner
nature, but these concepts and ideas burst forth from him as living,
actualised spirit. He no longer merely edified his hearers; he shook
the very foundations of their being. He no longer plunged their souls
into their inner being; he led them into a new life. This is recounted
to us symbolically: about forty people fell down through his preaching
and lay as if dead.

       *       *       *       *       *

As a guide to such a new life, we possess a book about whose author
nothing is known. Luther first made it known in print. The philologist,
Franz Pfeiffer, has recently printed it according to a manuscript of
the year 1497, with a modern German translation facing the original
text. What precedes the book indicates its purpose and its goal: “Here
begins the man from Frankfurt and saith many very lofty and very
beautiful things about a perfect life.” Upon this follows the “Preface
about the man from Frankfurt”: “Al-mighty, Eternal God hath uttered
this little book through a wise, understanding, truthful, righteous
man, his friend, who in former days was a German nobleman, a priest and
a custodian in the German House of Nobles at Frankfurt; it teacheth
many a lovely insight into Divine Wisdom, and especially how and
whereby one may know the true, righteous friends of God, and also the
unrighteous, false, free-thinkers, who are very hurtful to Holy Church.”

By “free-thinkers” one may perhaps understand those who live in a
merely conceptual world, like the “Master” described above before his
transformation by means of the “Friend of God,” and by the “true,
righteous friends of God,” such as possess the disposition of the
“layman.” One may further ascribe to the book the intention of so
working upon its readers as the “Friend of God from the Mountains” did
upon the Master. It is not known who the author was. But what does that
mean? It is not known when he was born and died, or what he did in his
outer life. That the author aimed to preserve eternal secrecy about
these facts of his outer life, belongs naturally to the way in which
he desired to work. It is not the “I” of this or the other man, born
at a definite point of time, who is to speak to us, but the “I-ness”
in the depths whereof “the separateness of individualities” (in the
sense of Paul Asmus’ saying[5]) must first unfold itself. “If God took
to Himself all men who are or who have ever been, and became man in
them, and they became God in Him, and it did not happen to me also,
then my fall and my turning away would never be made good, unless it
also happened in me too. And in this restoration and making good, I
neither can nor may nor should do anything thereto save a mere pure
suffering, so that God alone doeth and worketh all things in me, and
I suffer Him and all His works and His divine will. But if I will not
submit to this, but possess myself with egotism, _i.e._, with mine,
and I, to me, for me, and the like, that hinders God so that He cannot
work His work in me purely alone and without hindrance. Therefore my
fall and my turning away remain thus not made good.” The “man from
Frankfurt” aims to speak not as a separated individual; he desires
to let God speak. That he yet can do this only as a single, distinct
personality he naturally knows full well; but he is a “Friend of God,”
that means a man who aims not at presenting the nature of life through
contemplation, but at pointing out the beginning of a new evolutionary
pathway through the living spirit.

  [5] _Vide ante_, page 34.

The explanations in the book are various instructions as to how one
comes to this pathway. The root-thought returns again and again: man
must strip off everything that is connected with that which makes him
appear as a single, separate personality. This thought seems to be
worked out only in respect of the moral life; it should be extended,
without further ado, to the higher life of knowledge as well. One must
annihilate in oneself whatever appears as separateness: then separated
existence ceases; the All-Life enters into us. We cannot master this
All-Life by drawing it towards us. It comes into us, when we reduce
the separateness in us to silence. We have the All-Life least of all
just then, when we so regard our separated existence as if the Whole
already dwelt within it. This first comes to light in the separated
existence when this separated existence no longer claims for itself to
be anything. This pretension on the part of the separated existence our
text terms “assumption.”

Through “assumption” the self makes it impossible for itself that
the Universal Self should enter into it. The self then puts itself
as a part, as something imperfect, in the place of the whole, of the
perfect. “The perfect is a being, that in itself and in its being has
conceived and resolved all beings, and without which and apart from
which there is no true being, and in which all things have their being;
for it is the being of all things and is in itself unchangeable and
immovable, and changes and moves all other things. But the divided and
the imperfect is that which has sprung from out of this perfect, or
becomes, just as a ray or a light that flows forth from the sun or
a light and shines upon something, this or that. And that is called
the creature, and of all these divided things none is the perfect.
Therefore also is the perfect none of the divided.... When the perfect
cometh, the divided is despised. But when does it come? I say: When
so far as is possible it is known, felt, tasted in the soul; for the
defect lies wholly in us and not in it. For just as the sun illuminates
the whole world and is just as near to the one as to the other, yet
a blind man sees it not. But that is no defect of the sun but of the
blind man.... If my eye is to see anything, it must become cleansed, or
be already cleansed from all other things.... Now one might be inclined
to say: In so far then as it is unknowable and inconceivable for all
creatures, and since the soul is also a creature, how can it then be
known in the soul? Answer: Therefore is it said, the creature shall be
known _as a creature_.”

This is as much as to say that all creatures shall be regarded as
created and creation and not regard themselves as I-ness and self-ness,
whereby this knowing is made impossible. “For in whatever creature this
perfect one shall be known, there all creature-being, created-being,
I-ness, self-ness, and everything of the kind must be lost, be and
become naught.”[6] The soul must therefore look within itself; there
it finds its I-ness, its self-ness. If it remains standing there, it
thereby cuts itself off from the perfect. If it regards its I-ness only
as a thing lent to it as it were, and annihilates it in spirit, it will
be seized upon by the stream of the All-Life, of Perfection.

  [6] Chap. i., _Book of the Man from Frankfurt_.

“When the creature assumes to itself somewhat of good, as Being, Life,
Knowledge, Power, in short, aught of that which one calls good and
thinks that it is that, or that it belongs to it or comes from it, so
often and so much as that happens, does the creature turn away.” “The
created soul of man has two eyes. The one is the possibility of seeing
in eternity; the other of seeing in time and in creation.” “Man should
therefore stand and be quite free without himself, that is without
self-ness, I-ness, me, mine, for me and the like, so that he as little
seeks and thinks of himself and what is his in all things as if it did
not exist; and he should therefore also think little of himself, as if
he were not, and as if another had done all his deeds.”[7]

  [7] Chap. xv., _Book of the Man from Frankfurt_.

One must also take account of the fact in regard to the writer of
these sentences, that the thought-content, to which he gives a
direction by his higher ideas and feelings, is that of a believing
priest in the spirit of his own time. We are here concerned not with
the thought-content, but with the direction, not with the thoughts
but with the way of thinking. Any one who does not live as he does in
Christian dogmas, but in the conceptions of natural science, finds in
his sentences other thoughts; but with these other thoughts he points
in the same direction. And this direction is that which leads to the
overcoming of the self-hood, by the Self-hood itself. The highest light
shines for man in his Ego. But this light only then imparts to his
concept-world the right reflection, when he becomes aware that it is
not his own self-light, but the universal world-light.

Hence there is no more important knowledge than self-knowledge; and
there is equally no knowledge which leads so completely out beyond
itself. When the “self” knows itself aright, it is already no longer
a “self.” In his own language, the writer of the book in question
expresses this as follows: “For God’s ‘own-ness’ is void of this and
that, void of self-ness and I-ness; but the nature and own-ness of the
creature is that it seeketh and willeth itself and its own and ‘this’
and ‘that’; and in all that it does or leaves undone, it seeketh to
receive its own benefit and profit.”

“When, now, the creature or the man loseth his own-ness and his
self-ness and himself, and goeth out from himself, then God entereth in
with His Own-ness, that is with his Self-hood.”[8] Man soars upwards,
from a view of his “Ego” which makes the latter appear to him as his
very being, to a view such that it shows him his Ego as a mere organ,
in which the All-Being works upon itself. In the concept-sphere of our
text, this means: “If man can attain thereto that he belongeth unto God
just as a man’s hand belongeth to him, then let him content himself and
seek no further.”[9] That is not intended to mean that when man has
reached a certain stage of his evolution he shall stand still there,
but that, when he has got as far as is indicated in the above words,
he should not set on foot further investigations into the meaning of
the hand, but rather make use of the hand, in order that it may render
service to the body to which it belongs.

  [8] Chap. xxiv, _Book of the Man from Frankfurt_.

  [9] _Ibid._, Chap. liv.

       *       *       *       *       *

HEINRICH SUSO and JOHANNES RUYSBROEK possessed a type of mind which
may be characterised as genius for feeling. Their feelings are drawn
by something like instinct in the same direction in which Eckhart’s
and Tauler’s feelings were guided by their higher thought-life. Suso’s
heart turns devoutly towards that Root-Being which embraces the
individual man just as much as the whole remaining world, and in whom
forgetting himself, he yearns to lose himself as a drop of water in the
mighty ocean. He speaks of this his yearning towards the All-Being, not
as of something that he desires to embrace in thought; he speaks of it
as a natural impulse, that makes his soul drunken with desire for the
annihilation of its separated existence and its re-awakening to life in
the all-efficiency of the endless life. “Turn thine eyes to this being
in its pure naked simplicity, so that thou mayest let fall this and
that manifold being. Take being in itself alone, that is unmoved with
not-being; for all not-being denies all being. A thing that is yet to
become, or that has been, is not now in actual presence.”

“Now, one cannot know mixed being or not-being except by some mark of
being as a whole. For if one will understand a thing, the reason first
encounters being, and that is a being that worketh all things. It is
a divided being of this or that creature,--for divided being is all
mingled with something of other-ness, with a possibility of receiving
something. Therefore the nameless divine being must so be a _whole_
being in itself, that it sustaineth all divided beings by its presence.”

Thus speaks Suso in the autobiography which he wrote in conjunction
with his pupil Elsbet Stäglin. He, too, is a pious priest and lives
entirely in the Christian circle of thought. He lives therein as if it
were quite unthinkable that anybody with his mental tendency could live
in any other world. But of him also it is true that one can combine
another concept-content with his mental tendency. This is clearly borne
out by the way in which the content of the Christian teaching has
become for him actual inner experience, and his relation to Christ has
become a relation between his own spirit and the eternal truth in a
purely ideal, spiritual way.

He composed a “_Little Book of Eternal Wisdom_.” In this he makes the
“Eternal Wisdom” speak to its servant, in other words to himself:
“Knowest thou me not? How art thou so cast down, or hast thou lost
consciousness from agony of heart, my tender child? Behold it is
I, merciful Wisdom, who have opened wide the abyss of fathomless
compassion which yet is hidden from all the saints, tenderly to receive
thee and all repentant hearts; it is I, sweet Eternal Wisdom, who was
there poor and miserable, so as to bring thee to thy worthiness; it is
I, who suffered bitter death, that I might make thee to live again!
I stand here pale and bleeding and lovely, as I stood on the lofty
gallows of the cross between the stern judgment of my Father and thee.
It is I, thy brother; look, it is I, thy spouse! I have therefore
wholly forgotten all thou hast done against me, as if it had never
been, if only thou turnest wholly to me and separatest thyself no more
from me.”

All that is bodily and temporal in the Christian conception has become
for Suso, as one sees, a spiritual-ideal process in the recesses of his
soul. From some chapters of Suso’s biography mentioned above, it might
appear as if he had let himself be guided not by the mere action of his
own spiritual power, but through external revelations, through ghostly
visions. But he expresses his meaning quite clearly about this. One
attains to the truth through reasonableness, not through any kind of
revelation. “The difference between pure truth and two-souled visions
in the matter of knowledge I will also tell you. An immediate beholding
of the bare Godhead, that is right pure truth, without all doubt; and
every vision, so that it be reasonable and without pictures and the
more like it be unto that bare beholding, the purer and nobler it is.”

Meister Eckhart, too, leaves no doubt that he puts aside the view which
seeks to be spiritual in bodily-spacial forms, in appearances which one
can perceive by any senses. Minds of the type of Suso and Eckhart are
thus opponents of such a view, as that which finds expression in the
spiritualism which has developed during the nineteenth century.

       *       *       *       *       *

JOHANNES RUYSBROEK, the Belgian mystic, trod the same path as Suso. His
spiritual way found an active opponent in Johannes Gerson (born 1363),
who was for some time Chancellor of the University of Paris and played
a momentous rôle at the Council of Constance. Some light is thrown upon
the nature of the mysticism which was practised by Tauler, Suso and
Ruysbroek, if one compares it with the mystic endeavours of Gerson, who
had his predecessors in Richard de St. Victor, Bonaventura, and others.

Ruysbroek himself fought against those whom he reckoned among the
heretical mystics. As such he considered all those who, through an
easy-going judgment of the understanding, hold that all things proceed
from one Root-Being, who therefore see in the world only a manifoldness
and in God the unity of this manifoldness. Ruysbroek does not count
himself among these, for he knew that one cannot attain to the
Root-Being by the contemplation of things, but only by raising oneself
from this lower mode of contemplation to a higher one.

Similarly, he turned against those who seek to see without further
ado, in the individual man, in his separated existence (in his
creature-being), his higher nature also. He deplored not a little the
error which confuses all differences in the sense-world, and asserts
light-mindedly that things are different only in appearance, but that
in their being they are all alike. This would amount, for a way of
thinking like Ruysbroek’s, to the same thing as saying: That the fact
that the trees in an avenue seem to our seeing to come together does
not concern us. In reality they are everywhere equally far apart,
therefore our eyes ought to accustom themselves to see correctly.
But our eyes see aright. That the trees run together depends upon a
necessary law of nature; and we have nothing to reproach our seeing
with, but on the contrary to recognise in spirit why we see them thus.

Moreover, the mystic does not turn away from the things of the senses.
As things of the senses, he accepts them as they are, and it is
clear to him that through no judgment of the understanding can they
become otherwise. But in spirit he passes beyond both senses and
understanding, and then only does he find the unity. His faith is
unshakable that he can develop himself to the beholding of this unity.
Therefore does he ascribe to the nature of man the divine spark which
can be brought to shine in him, to shine by its own light.

People of the type of Gerson think otherwise. They do not believe in
this self-shining. For them, what man can behold remains always a
something external, that from some side or other must come to them
externally. Ruysbroek believed that the highest wisdom must needs shine
forth for mystic contemplation. Gerson believed only that the soul can
illuminate the content of an external teaching (that of the Church).
For Gerson, Mysticism was nothing else but possessing a warm feeling
for everything that is revealed in this teaching. For Ruysbroek, it was
a faith, that the content of all teaching is also born in the soul.
Therefore Gerson blames Ruysbroek in that the latter imagines that not
only has he the power to behold the All-Being with clearness, but that
in this beholding there expresses itself an activity of the All-Being.
Ruysbroek simply could not be understood by Gerson. Both spoke of two
wholly different things. Ruysbroek has in his mind’s eye the life of
the soul that lives itself into oneness with its God; Gerson, only a
soul-life that seeks to love the God whom it can never actually live
in itself. Like many others, Gerson fought against something that was
strange to him only because he could not grasp it in experience.




                       CARDINAL NICHOLAS OF CUSA

A gloriously shining star in the sky of the thought-life of the Middle
Ages is Nicholas Chrysippus of Cusa (at Trevis, 1401-1464). He stands
upon the summit of the knowledge of his time. In mathematics he
accomplished remarkable work. In natural science he may be described as
the forerunner of Copernicus, for he took up the standpoint that the
earth is a moving celestial body like others. He had already broken
away from a view upon which even a hundred years later the great
astronomer, Tycho Brahe, based himself, when he hurled against the
teaching of Copernicus the sentence: “The earth is a gross, heavy mass
inapt for movement; how, then, can Copernicus make a star of it and
run it about in the air?” The same man who thus not only embraced all
the knowledge of his time, but also extended it further, possessed in
addition, in a high degree, the power of awakening this knowledge in
the inner life, so that it not only illuminates the external world, but
also mediates for man that spiritual life, which from the profounder
depths of his soul he needs must long after.

If we compare Nicholas with such spirits as Eckhart or Tauler, we
obtain a remarkable result. Nicholas is the scientific thinker,
striving to lift himself from research about the things of the world
on to the level of a higher perception; Eckhart and Tauler are the
faithful believers, who seek the higher life from within the content
of this faith. Eventually Nicholas arrives at the same inner life as
Meister Eckhart; but the inner life of the former has a rich store of
knowledge as its content.

The full significance of this difference becomes clear when we reflect
that for the student of science the danger lies very near at hand of
misunderstanding the scope of that species of knowing which enlightens
us regarding the various special departments of knowledge. He can
very readily be misled into believing that there really is only one
single kind or mode of knowledge; and then he will either over- or
under-rate this knowledge which leads us to the goal in the various
special sciences. In the one case he will approach the subject-matter
of the highest spiritual life as he would a problem in physics, and
proceed to deal with it by means of concepts such as he would apply to
gravitation or electricity. Thus, according as he believes himself to
be more or less enlightened, the world will appear to him as a blindly
working machine, or an organism, or as the teleological structure of
a personal God: perhaps even as a form which is ruled and pervaded by
a more or less clearly conceived “World-Soul.” In the other case he
notes that the knowledge, of which alone he has any experience, is
adapted only to the things of the sense-world; and then he will become
a sceptic, saying to himself: We can know nothing about things which
lie beyond the world of the senses. Our knowledge has a limit. For
the needs of the higher life we have no choice but to throw ourselves
blindly into the arms of faith untouched by knowledge. And for a
learned theologian like Nicholas of Cusa, who was also a scientist,
this second danger lay peculiarly near at hand. For he emerged, along
the lines of his learned training, from Scholasticism,--the way of
conceiving things which was dominant in scientific life within the
Mediæval Church; a mode of thought that St. Thomas Aquinas (1227-1274),
the “Prince of Scholastics,” had brought to its highest perfection. We
must take this mode of conceiving things as the background, when we
desire to portray the personality of Nicholas of Cusa.

Scholasticism is, in the highest degree, a product of human sagacity;
and in it the logical capacity celebrated its highest triumphs. Any one
who is striving to work out concepts in their sharpest, most clear-cut
outlines, ought to go to the Scholastics for instruction. They afford
us the High School for the technique of thinking. They possess an
incomparable skill in moving in the field of pure thinking. It is easy
to under-value what they were able to achieve in this field; for it
is only with difficulty accessible to man as regards most departments
of knowledge. The majority rise to its level only in the domains of
numbers and calculation, and in reflecting upon the connection of
geometrical figures.

We can count by adding in thought a unity to a number, without needing
to call to our help sense-conceptions. We calculate also, without such
conceptions, in the pure element of thought. In regard to geometrical
figures, we know that they never perfectly coincide with any sensible
perception. There is no such thing within sensible reality as an
“ideal” circle. Yet our thinking concerns itself with the purely
ideal circle. For things and processes which are more complicated than
forms of number and space, it is more difficult to find the ideal
counterparts. This has even led so far that it has been contended, from
various sides, that in the separated departments of knowledge there is
only so much of real science as there is of measuring and counting.

The truth about this is that most men are not capable of grasping the
pure thought-element where it is no longer concerned with what can be
counted or measured. But the man who cannot do that for the higher
realms of life and knowledge, resembles in that respect a child, which
has not yet learned to count otherwise than by adding one pea to
another. The thinker who said there was just so much real science in
any domain as there was mathematics in it, was not very much at home in
the matter. One ought rather to demand that everything which cannot be
measured or counted should be handled just as ideally as the forms of
number and space. And the Scholastics in the fullest way did justice to
this demand. They sought everywhere the thought-content of things, just
as the mathematician seeks it in the field of what is measurable and
countable.

In spite of this perfected logical art, the Scholastics attained
only to a one-sided and subordinate conception of Knowledge. Their
conception is this: that in the act of knowing, man creates in himself
an image of what he is to know. It is obvious, without further
discussion, that with such a conception of the knowing process all
reality must be located outside of the knowing. For one can grasp, in
knowing, not the thing itself, but only an image of that thing.

Also, in knowing himself man cannot grasp himself, but again, what he
does know of himself is only an image of himself. It is entirely from
out of the spirit of Scholasticism that an accurate student thereof[10]
says: “Man has in time no perception of his ego, of the hidden ground
of his spiritual being and life, ... he will never attain to beholding
himself; for either, estranged for ever from God, he will find in
himself only a fathomless, dark abyss, an endless emptiness, or else,
made blessed in God, he will find on turning his gaze inwards just that
very God, the sun of whose mercy is shining within him, whose image
and likeness shapes itself in the spiritual traits of his nature.”

  [10] K. Werner, in his book upon _Frank Suarez and the Scholasticism
  of the Last Centuries_, p. 122.

Whoever thinks like this about all knowing, has only such a conception
of knowing as is applicable to external things. The sensible factor in
anything always remains external for us; therefore we can only take up
into our knowledge pictures of whatever is sensible in the world. When
we perceive a colour or a stone, we are unable, in order to know the
being of the colour or the stone, to become ourselves the colour or
the stone. Just as little can the colour or the stone transform itself
into a part of our own being. It may, however, be questioned whether
the conception of such a knowing-process, wholly directed to what is
external in things, is an exhaustive one.

For Scholasticism, all human knowing does certainly in the main
coincide with this kind of knowing. Another admirable authority on
Scholasticism[11] characterises the conception of knowledge with which
we are concerned in this direction of thought in the following manner:
“Our spirit, allied in earth-life with the body, is primarily focussed
upon the surrounding bodily world, but ordered in the direction of the
spiritual therein: the beings, natures, forms of things, the elements
of existence, which are related to our spirit and offer to it the rungs
for its ascent to the super-sensuous; the field of our knowledge is
therefore the realm of experience, but we must learn to understand what
it offers, to penetrate to its meaning and thought, and thereby unlock
for ourselves the world of thought.”

  [11] Otto Willman, in his _History of Idealism_, vol. ii., p. 395.

The Scholastic could not attain to any other conception of knowledge,
for the dogmatic content of his theology prevented his doing so. If he
had directed the gaze of his spiritual eye upon that which he regards
as an image only, he would then have seen that the spiritual content of
things reveals itself in this supposed image; he would then have found
that in his own inner being the God not alone images Himself, but that
He lives therein, is present there in His own nature. He would have
beheld in gazing into his own inner being, not a dark abyss, an endless
emptiness, but also not merely an image of God; he would have felt that
a life pulses within him, which is the very life of God itself; and
that his own life is verily just God’s life.

This the Scholastic dared not admit. The God must not, in his opinion,
enter into him and speak forth from him; God must only be in him
as an image. In reality, the Godhead must be external to the self.
Accordingly, also, it could not reveal itself from within through
the spiritual life, but must reveal itself from outside, through
supernatural communication. What is aimed at in this, is just exactly
what is least of all attained thereby. It is sought to attain to the
highest possible conception of the Godhead. In reality, the Godhead
is dragged down and made a thing among other things; only that these
other things reveal themselves to us naturally, through experience;
while the Godhead is supposed to reveal Itself to us supernaturally.
A difference, however, between the knowledge of the divine and of
the created is attained in this way: that as regards the created,
the external thing is given in experience, so that we have knowledge
of it; while as regards the divine, the object is not given to us in
experience; we can reach it only in faith.

The highest things, therefore, are for the Scholastic not objects
of knowledge, but mainly of faith. It is true that the relation
of knowledge to faith must not be so conceived, according to the
Scholastic view, as if in a certain domain only knowledge, and in
another only faith reigned. For “the knowledge of that which is, is
possible to us, because it, itself, springs from a creative element;
things are for the spirit, because they are from the spirit; they
have something to tell us, because they have a meaning which a higher
intelligence has placed in them.”[12] Because God has created the
world according to thoughts, we too are able, when we grasp the
thoughts of the world, to seize also upon the traces of the Divine in
the world, through scientific reflection. But what God is, according
to His own being, we can learn only from that revelation which He has
given to us in supernatural ways, and in which we must believe. What
we ought to think about the highest things, must be decided not by
any human knowledge, but by faith; and “to faith belongs all that is
contained in the writings of the New and of the Old Testament, and in
the divine traditions.”[13]

  [12] Otto Willman, _History of Idealism_, vol. ii., p. 383.

  [13] Joseph Kleutgen, _Die Theologie der Vorzeit_, vol. i., p. 39.

It is not our task here to present and establish in detail the relation
of the content of faith to the content of knowledge. In truth, all
and every faith-content originates from some actual inner human
experience that has once been undergone. Such an experience is then
preserved, as far as its outer form goes, without the consciousness
of how it was acquired. And people maintain in regard to it that it
came into the world by supernatural revelation. The content of the
Christian faith was simply accepted by the Scholastics. Science, inner
experience, had no business to claim any rights over it. As little
as science can create a tree, just so little dared Scholasticism to
create a conception of God; it was bound to accept the revealed one
ready-made and complete, just as natural science has to accept the
tree ready-made. That the spiritual itself can shine forth and live in
man’s inner nature, could never, never be admitted by the Scholastic.
He therefore drew the frontier of the rightful power of knowledge at
the point where the domain of outer experience ceases. Human knowledge
must not dare to beget out of itself a conception of the higher beings;
it is bound to accept a revealed one. The Scholastics naturally could
not admit that in doing so they were accepting and proclaiming as
“revealed” a conception which in truth had really been begotten at an
earlier stage of man’s spiritual life.

Thus, in the course of its development, all those ideas had vanished
from Scholasticism which indicated the ways and means by which man had
begotten, in a natural manner, his conceptions of the divine. In the
first centuries of the development of Christianity, at the time of the
Church Fathers, we see the doctrinal content of theology growing bit
by bit by the assimilation of inner experiences. In Johannes Scotus
Erigena, who stood at the summit of Christian theological culture
in the ninth century, we find this doctrinal content being handled
entirely as an inner living experience. With the Scholastics of the
following centuries, this characteristic of an inner, living experience
disappears altogether: the old doctrinal content becomes transposed
into the content of an external, supernatural revelation.

One might, therefore, understand the activity of the mystical
theologians, Eckhart, Tauler, Suso and their associates, in the
following sense: they were stimulated by the doctrines of the Church,
which were contained in its theology, but had been misinterpreted,
to bring to birth afresh from within themselves, as inner living
experience, a similar content.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nicholas of Cusa sets out to mount from the knowledge one acquires in
the isolated sciences up to the inner living experiences. There can be
no doubt that the excellent logical technique which the Scholastics
have developed, and for which Nicholas himself was educated, forms a
most effective means of attaining to these inner experiences, even
though the Scholastics themselves were held back from this road by
their positive faith. But one can only understand Nicholas fully when
one reflects that his calling as a priest, which raised him to the
dignity of Cardinal, prevented him from coming to a complete breach
with the faith of the Church, which found an expression appropriate
to the age in Scholasticism. We find him so far along the road, that
a single step further would necessarily have carried him out of the
Church. We shall therefore understand the Cardinal best if we complete
the one step more which he did not take; and then, looking backwards,
throw light upon what he aimed at.

The most significant thought in Nicholas’s mental life is that of
“learned ignorance.” By this he means a form of knowing which occupies
a higher level as compared with ordinary knowledge. In the lower sense,
knowledge is the grasping of an object by the mind, or spirit. The
most important characteristic of knowing is that it gives us light
about something outside of the spirit, that therefore it directs its
gaze upon something different from itself. The spirit, therefore, is
concerned in the knowing-process with things thought of as outside
itself. Now what the spirit develops in itself about things is the
being of those things. The things are spirit. Man sees the spirit so
far only through the sensible encasement. What lies outside the spirit
is only this sensible encasement; the being of the things enters into
the spirit. If, then, the spirit turns its attention to this being of
the things, which is of like nature with itself, then it can no longer
talk of knowing; for it is not looking at anything outside of itself,
but is looking at something which is part of itself; is, indeed,
looking at itself. It no longer knows; it only looks upon itself. It
is no longer concerned with a “knowing,” but with a “not-knowing.”
No longer does man “grasp” something through the mind; he “beholds
without conceiving” his own life. This highest stage of knowing is, in
comparison with the lower stages, a “not-knowing.”

But it is obvious that the essential being of things can only be
reached through this stage of knowing. Thus Nicholas of Cusa in
speaking of his “learned not-knowing” is really speaking of nothing
else but “knowing” come to a new birth, as an inner experience. He
tells us himself how he came to this inner experience. “I made many
efforts to unite the ideas of God and the world, of Christ and the
Church, into a single root-idea; but nothing satisfied me until at
last, on my way back from Greece by sea, my mind’s vision, as if by
an illumination from above, soared up to that perception in which God
appeared to me as the supreme Unity of all contradictions.” To a
greater or lesser extent this illumination was due to influences derived
from the study of his predecessors. One recognises in his way of
looking at things a peculiar revival of the views which we meet with in
the writings of a certain Dionysius. The above-mentioned Scotus Erigena
translated these writings into Latin, and speaks of their author as the
“great and divine revealer.”

The works in question are first mentioned in the first half of the
sixth century. They were ascribed to that Dionysius, the Areopagite,
named in the Acts of the Apostles, who was converted to Christianity
by St. Paul. When these writings were really composed may here be left
an open question. Their contents worked powerfully upon Nicholas as
they had already worked upon Scotus Erigena, and as they must also
have been in many ways stimulating for the way of thinking of Eckhart
and his colleagues. This “learned not-knowing” is in a certain way
preformed in these writings. Here we can only indicate the essential
trait in the way of conceiving things found in these works. Man
primarily knows the things of the sense-world. He forms thoughts about
its being and action. The Primal Cause of all things must lie higher
than these things themselves. Man therefore must not seek to grasp
this Primal Cause by means of the same concepts and ideas as things.
If he therefore ascribes to the Root-Being (God) attributes which
he has learned to know in lower things, such attributes can be at
best auxiliary conceptions of his weak spirit, which drags down the
Root-Being to itself, in order to conceive it.

In truth, therefore, no attribute whatsoever which lower things
possess can be predicated of God. It must not even be said that God
“is.” For “being” too is a concept which man has formed from lower
things. But God is exalted above “being” and “not-being.” The God to
whom we ascribe attributes, is therefore not the true God. We come to
the true God, when we think of an “Over-God” above and beyond any God
with such attributes. Of this “Over-God” we can know nothing in the
ordinary sense. In order to attain to Him, “knowing” must merge into
“not-knowing.”

One sees that at the root of such a view there lies the consciousness
that man himself is able to develop a higher knowing, which is no
longer mere knowing--in a purely natural manner--on the basis of what
his various sciences have yielded him. The Scholastic view declared
knowledge to be impotent to such a development; and, at the point where
knowledge is supposed to cease, it called in to the help of knowledge
a faith basing itself upon external revelation. Nicholas of Cusa was
thus upon the road to develop out of knowledge itself that which the
Scholastics had declared to be unattainable for knowledge.

We thus see that, from Nicholas of Cusa’s point of view, there can be
no question of there being only one kind or mode of knowing. On the
contrary, for him, knowing clearly divides itself into two, first into
such knowing as mediates our acquaintance with external objects, and
second into such as is itself the object of which one gains knowledge.
The first mode of knowing is dominant in the sciences, which teach us
about the things and occurrences of the outer world; the second is
in us when we ourselves live in the knowledge we have acquired. This
second kind of knowing grows out of the first. Now, however, it is
still one and the same world with which both these modes of knowing
are concerned; and it is one and the self-same man who is active in
both. Hence the question must arise, whence comes it that one and the
self-same man develops two different kinds of knowledge of one and the
same world.

Already, in connection with Tauler, the direction could be indicated
in which the answer to this question must be sought. Here in Nicholas
of Cusa this answer can be still more definitely formulated. In the
first place, man lives as a separated (individual) being amidst other
separated beings. In addition to the effects which the other beings
produce on each other, there arises in his case the (lower) knowledge.
Through his senses he receives impressions from other beings, and works
up these impressions with his inner spiritual powers. He then turns his
spiritual gaze away from external things, and beholds himself as well
as his own activity. In so doing self-knowledge arises in him. But so
long as he remains on this level of self-knowledge, he does not, in the
true sense of the word, behold himself. He can still believe that some
hidden being is active within him, whose manifestations and effects are
_only_ that which appears to him to be his own activities. But now the
moment may come in which, through an incontrovertible inner experience,
it becomes clear to the man that he experiences, in what he perceives
or feels within himself, not the manifestation or effect of any hidden
power or being, but this very being itself in its most essential and
intimate form. Then he can say to himself: In a certain way I find all
other things ready given, and I myself, standing apart from and outside
of them, add to them whatever the spirit has to tell about them. But
what I thus creatively add to the things in myself, therein do I myself
live; that is myself, my very own being. But what is that which speaks
there in the depths of my spirit? It is the knowledge which I have
acquired of the things of the world. But in this knowledge there speaks
no longer an effect, a manifestation; that which speaks expresses
itself wholly, holding back nothing of what it contains. In this
knowledge, there speaks the world in all its immediacy. But I have
acquired this knowledge of things and of myself, as one thing among
other things. From out my own being I myself speak, and the things,
too, speak.

Thus, in truth, I am giving utterance no longer only to my own being;
I am also giving utterance to the being of things themselves. My “ego”
is the form, the organ in which the things express themselves about
themselves. I have gained the experience that in myself I experience
my own essential being; and this experience expands itself in me to
the further one that in myself and through myself the All-Being Itself
expresses Itself, or in other words, knows Itself. I can now no longer
feel myself as a thing among other things; I can now only feel myself
as a form in which the All-Being lives out Its own life.

It is thus only natural that one and the same man should have two
modes of knowing. Judging by the facts of the senses, he is a thing
among other things, and, in so far as he is that, he gains for himself
a knowledge of these things; but at any moment he can acquire the
higher experience that he is really the form in which the All-Being
beholds Itself. Then man transforms himself from a thing among other
things into a form of the All-Being--and, along with himself, the
knowledge of things transforms itself into the expression of the very
being of things. But as a matter of fact this transformation can only
be accomplished through man. That which is mediated in the higher
knowledge does not exist as long as this higher knowledge itself is not
present. Man becomes only a real being in the creation of this higher
knowledge; and only through man’s higher knowledge can things also
bring their being forth into real existence.

If, therefore, we demand that man shall add nothing to things through
his inner knowledge, but merely give expression to whatever already
exists in the things outside of himself, that would really amount to a
complete abnegation of all higher knowledge. From the fact that man,
in respect of his sensible life, is merely one thing among others,
and that he only attains to the higher knowledge when he himself
accomplishes with himself, as a being of the senses, the transformation
into a higher being, it follows that he can never replace the one
kind of knowledge by the other. His spiritual life consists, on the
contrary, in a ceaseless oscillation between these two poles of
knowledge--between knowing and seeing. If he shuts himself off from
the seeing, he abandons the real nature of things: if he seeks to shut
himself off from sense-perception, he would shut out from himself the
things whose nature he seeks to know. It is these very same things
which reveal themselves alike in the lower knowing and the higher
seeing; only in the one case they reveal themselves according to their
outer appearance; in the other according to their inner being. Thus
it is not due to the things themselves that, at a certain stage, they
appear only as external things; but their doing so is due to the fact
that man must first of all raise and transform himself to the level
upon which the things cease to be external and outside.

In the light of these considerations, some of the views which natural
science has developed during the nineteenth century appear for the
first time in the right light. The supporters of these views tell us
that we hear, see, and touch the objects of the physical world through
our senses. The eye, for instance, transmits to us a phenomenon of
light, a colour. Thus we say that a body emits red light, when with the
help of the eye we experience the sensation “red.” But the eye can give
us this same sensation in other cases also. If the eyeball is struck or
pressed upon, or if an electric spark is allowed to pass through the
head, the eye has a sensation of light.

It is thus evident that even in the cases in which we have the
sensation of a body emitting red light, something may really be
happening in that body which has no sort of resemblance to the colour
we sensate. Whatever may be actually happening “outside of us” in
space, so long as what happens is capable of making an impression
on the eye, there arises in us the sensation of light. Thus what we
experience _arises in us_, because we possess organs constituted in
a particular manner. What happens outside in space, remains outside
of us; we know only the effects which the external happenings call
up in us. Hermann Helmholtz (1821-1893) has given a clearly outlined
expression to this thought:

“Our sensations are simply effects which are produced in our organs
by external causes, and the manner in which such an effect will show
itself depends, naturally enough, altogether upon the kind of apparatus
upon which the action takes place. In so far as the quality of our
sensation gives us information as to the peculiar nature of the
external action which produces the sensation, so far can the sensation
be regarded as a sign or symbol of this external action, but not as an
image or reproduction of it. For we expect in a picture some kind of
resemblance to the object it represents; thus in a statue, resemblance
of form; in a drawing, resemblance in the perspective projection of
the field of view; in a painting, resemblance of colour in addition.
A symbol, however, is not required to have any sort of resemblance to
that which it symbolises. The necessary connection between the object
and the symbol is limited to this: that the same object coming into
action under the same conditions shall call up the same symbol, and
that therefore different symbols shall always correspond to different
objects. When berries of a certain kind in ripening produce together
red colouration and sugar, then red colour and a sweet taste will
always find themselves together in our sensation of berries of this
form.”[14]

  [14] _Cp._ Helmholtz, _Die Thatsachen der Wahrnehmung_, p. 12 _et
  seq._ I have characterised this kind of conception in detail in
  my _Philosophie der Freiheit_, Berlin, 1894, and in my _Welt- und
  Lebensanschauungen im Neunzehnten Jahrhundert_, vol. ii., p. i., etc.

Let us follow out step by step the line of thought which this view
makes its own. It is assumed that something happens outside of me in
space; this produces an effect upon my sense-organs; and my nervous
system conducts the impression thus made to my brain. There another
occurrence is brought about. I experience the sensation “red.” Now
follows the assertion: therefore the sensation “red” is not outside,
not external to me; it is _in_ me. All our sensations are merely
symbols or signs of external occurrences of whose real quality we
know nothing. We live and move in our sensations and know nothing of
their origin. In the spirit of this line of thought, it would thus be
possible to assert that if we had no eyes, colour would not exist; for
then there would be nothing to translate this, to us, wholly unknown
external happening into the sensation “red.”

For many people this line of thought possesses a curious attraction;
but nevertheless it originates in a complete misconception of the
facts under consideration. (Were it not that many of the present day
scientists and philosophers are blinded even to absurdity by this line
of thought, one would need to say less about it. But, as a matter of
fact, this blindness has ruined in many respects the thinking of the
present day.) In truth, since man is but one object or thing among
other things, it naturally follows that if he is to have any experience
of them at all, they must make an impression upon him somehow or other.
Something that happens outside the man must cause something to happen
within him, if in his visual field the sensation “red” is to make its
appearance.

The whole question turns upon this: What is without? what within?
Outside of him something happens in space and time. But within there
is undoubtedly a similar occurrence. For in the eye there occurs such
a process, which manifests itself to the brain when I perceive the
colour “red.” This process which goes on “inside” me, I cannot perceive
directly, any more than I can directly perceive the wave motions
“outside” which the physicist conceives of as answering to the colour
“red.” But really it is only in this sense that I can speak of an
“inside” and an “outside” at all. Only on the plane of sense-perception
can the opposition between “outside” and “inside” hold good.

The recognition of this leads me to assume the existence “outside” of
a process in space and time, although I do not directly perceive it at
all. And the same recognition further leads me to postulate a similar
process within myself, although I cannot directly perceive that either.
But, as a matter of fact, I habitually postulate analogous occurrences
in space and time in ordinary life which I do not directly perceive;
as, for instance, when I hear piano-playing next door, and assume that
a human being in space is seated at the piano and is playing upon it.
And my conception, when I speak of processes happening outside of,
and within me, is just the same. I assume that these processes have
qualities analogous to those of the processes which do fall within the
province of my senses, only that, because of certain reasons, they
escape my direct perception.

If I were to attempt to deny to these processes all the qualities which
my senses show me in the domains of space and time, I should in reality
and in truth be trying to think of something not unlike the famous knife
without a handle, whose blade was wanting. Therefore, I can only say
that space and time processes take place “outside” me; these bring
about space and time processes “within” me; and both are necessary if
the sensation “red” is to appear in my field of vision. And, in so far
as this “red” is not in space and time, I shall seek for it equally in
vain, whether I seek “without” or “within” myself. Those scientists and
philosophers who cannot find it “outside,” ought not to want to find it
“inside” either. For it is not “inside,” in exactly the same sense in
which it is not “outside.” To declare that the total content of that
which the sense-world presents to us is but an inner world of sensation
or feeling, and then to endeavour to tack on something “external” or
“outside” to it, is a wholly impossible conception.

Hence, we must not speak of “red,” “sweet,” “hot,” etc., as being
symbols, or signs, which as such are only aroused within us, and to
which “outside” of us something totally different corresponds. For
that which is really set going within us, as the effect of some
external happening, is something altogether other than what appears in
the field of our sensations. If we want to call that which is within us
a symbol, then we can say: These symbols make their appearance within
our organism, in order to mediate to us the perceptions which, as such,
in their immediacy, are neither within nor outside of us, but belong,
on the contrary, to that common world, of which my “external” world and
my “internal” world are only parts. In order to be able to grasp this
common world, I must, it is true, raise myself to that higher plane
of knowledge, for which an “inner” and an “outer” no longer exist. (I
know quite well that people who pride themselves on the gospel that
our entire world of experience builds itself up out of sensations and
feelings of unknown origin will look contemptuously upon these remarks;
as, for instance, Dr. Erich Adikes in his book, _Kant contra Haeckel_,
observes condescendingly: “At first people like Haeckel and thousands
of his type philosophise gaily away without troubling themselves about
theory of knowledge or critical self-reflection.” Such gentlemen have
no inkling of how cheap their own theories of knowledge are. They
suspect the lack of critical self-reflection only in others. Let us
leave to them their “wisdom.”)

Nicholas of Cusa expresses some very telling thoughts bearing directly
upon this very point. The clear and distinct way in which he holds
apart the lower and the higher knowledge enables him, on the one side,
to arrive at a full and complete recognition of the fact that man as a
sense-being can only have in himself processes which, as effects, must
necessarily be altogether unlike the corresponding external processes;
while, on the other side, it guards him against confusing the inner
processes with the facts which make their appearance in the field of
our perceptions, and which, in their immediacy, are neither outside nor
inside, but altogether transcend this opposition of “in” and “out.”

But Nicholas was hampered in the thorough carrying through of these
ideas by his “priestly garments.” So we see how he makes a fine
beginning with the progress from “knowing” to “not-knowing.” At the
same time we must also note that in the domain of the higher knowledge,
or “ignorance,” he unfolds practically nothing but the content of the
theological teaching which the Scholastics also give us. Certainly he
knows how to expound this theological content in a most able manner. He
presents us with teachings about Providence, Christ, the creation of
the world, man’s salvation, the moral life, which are kept thoroughly
in harmony with dogmatic Christianity. It would have been in accordance
with his mental starting point, to say: I have confidence in human
nature that after having plunged deeply into the science of things in
all directions, it is capable of transforming from within itself this
“knowing” into a “not-knowing,” in such wise that the highest insight
shall bring satisfaction. In that case, he would not simply have
accepted the traditional ideas of the soul, immortality, salvation,
God, creation, the Trinity, and so forth, as he actually did, but he
would have represented his own.

But Nicholas personally was, however, so saturated with the conceptions
of Christianity that he might well believe himself to have awakened in
himself a “not-knowing” of his own, while yet he was merely bringing to
light the traditional views in which he was brought up. But he stood
upon the verge of a terrible precipice in the spiritual life of man. He
was a _scientific_ man. Now science, primarily, estranges us from the
innocent harmony in which we live with the world so long as we abandon
ourselves to a purely naïve attitude towards life. In such an attitude
to life, we dimly feel our connection with the world-whole.

We are beings like others, forming links in the chain of Nature’s
workings. But with knowledge we separate ourselves off from this
whole; we create within us a mental world, wherewith we stand alone and
isolated over against Nature. We have become enriched; but our riches
are a burden which we bear with difficulty; for it weighs primarily
upon ourselves alone. And we must now, by our own strength, find the
way back again to Nature. We have to recognise that we ourselves
must now fit our wealth into the stream of world activities, just as
previously Nature herself had fitted in our poverty. All evil demons
lie in wait for man at this point. His strength can easily fail
him. Instead of himself accomplishing this fitting in, he will, if
his strength thus fails, seek refuge in some revelation coming from
without, which frees him again from his loneliness, which leads back
once more to the knowledge that he feels a burden, into the very womb
of being, into the Godhead. Like Nicholas of Cusa, he will believe
that he is travelling his own road; and yet in reality he will be only
following the path which his own spiritual evolution has pointed out
for him.

Now there are--in the main--three roads which one can follow, when
once one has reached the point at which Nicholas had arrived: the one
is positive faith, forcing itself upon us from without; the second
is despair; one stands alone with one’s burden, and feels the whole
universe tottering with oneself; the third road is the development of
the deepest, most inward powers of man. Confidence, trust in the world
must be one of our guides upon this third path; courage, to follow that
confidence whithersoever it may lead us, must be the other.




                      AGRIPPA VON NETTESHEIM AND
                        THEOPHRASTUS PARACELSUS

Both Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa von Nettesheim (1487-1535) and
Theophrastus Paracelsus (1493-1541) followed the same road along which
points Nicholas of Cusa’s way of conceiving things. They devoted
themselves to the study of Nature, and sought to discover her laws by
all the means in their power and as thoroughly as possible. In this
knowledge of Nature, they saw the true basis of all higher knowledge.
They strove to develop this higher knowledge from within the science or
knowledge of Nature by bringing that knowledge to a new birth in the
spirit.

Agrippa von Nettesheim led a much varied life. He sprang from a noble
family and was born in Cologne. He early studied medicine and law, and
sought to obtain clear insight into the processes of Nature in the
way which was then customary within certain circles and societies, or
even among isolated investigators, who studiously kept secret whatever
of the knowledge of Nature they discovered. For these purposes he
went repeatedly to Paris, to Italy, and to England, and also visited
the famous Abbot Trithemius of Sponheim in Würzburg. He taught at
various times in learned institutions, and here and there entered the
service of rich and distinguished people, at whose disposal he placed
his abilities as a statesman and a man of science. If the services
that he rendered are not always described by his biographers as
unobjectionable, if it is said that he made money under the pretence of
understanding secret arts and conferring benefits on people thereby,
there stands against this his unmistakable, unresting impulse to
acquire honestly the entire knowledge of his age, and to deepen this
knowledge in the direction of a higher cognition of the world.

We may see in him very plainly the endeavour to attain to a clear and
definite attitude towards natural science on the one hand, and to
the higher knowledge on the other. But he only can attain to such an
attitude who is possessed of a clear insight as to the respective roads
which lead to one and to the other kind of knowledge. As true as it is
on the one hand that natural science must eventually be raised into the
region of the spirit, if it is to pass over into higher knowledge; so,
also, it is true on the other, that this natural science must, to begin
with, remain upon its own special ground, if it is to yield the right
basis for the attainment of a higher level. The “spirit in Nature”
exists only for spirit. So surely as Nature in this sense is spiritual,
so surely too is there _nothing_ in Nature, of all that is perceived by
my bodily organs, which is immediately spiritual. There exists nothing
spiritual which can appear to my eye as spiritual.

Therefore, I must not seek for the spirit as such in Nature; but that
is what I am doing when I interpret any occurrence in the external
world immediately as spiritual; when, for instance, I ascribe to a
plant a soul which is supposed to be only remotely analogous to that of
man. Further, I again do the same when I ascribe to spirit itself an
existence in space and time; as, for instance, when I assert of the
human soul that it continues to exist in time without the body, but
yet after the manner of a body; or again, when I even go so far as to
believe that, under any sort of conditions or arrangements perceivable
by the senses, the spirit of a dead person can show itself.

Spiritualism, which makes this mistake, only shows thereby that it has
not attained to a true conception of the spirit at all, but is still
bent upon directly and immediately “seeing” the spirit in something
grossly sensible. It mistakes equally both the real nature of the
sensible and also that of the spirit. It de-spiritualises the ordinary
world of sense, which hourly passes before our eyes, in order to give
the name of spirit immediately to something rare, surprising, uncommon.
It fails to understand that that which lives as the “spirit in nature”
reveals itself to him who is able to perceive spirit in the collision
of two elastic balls, for instance; and not only in occurrences which
are striking from their rarity, and which cannot all at once be grasped
in their natural sequence and connection.

But the spiritist further drags the spirit down into a lower sphere.
Instead of explaining something that happens in space, and that he
perceives through his senses only, in terms of forces and beings which
in their turn are spacial and perceptible to the senses, he resorts to
“spirits,” which he thereby places exactly on a level with the things
of the senses. At the very root of such a way of viewing things, there
lies a lack of the power of spiritual apprehension. We are unable
to perceive spiritual things spiritually; we therefore satisfy our
craving for the spiritual with mere beings perceptible to the senses.
Their own inner spirit reveals to such men nothing spiritual; and
therefore they seek for the spiritual through the senses. As they see
clouds flying through the air, so they would fain see spirits hastening
along. Agrippa von Nettesheim fought for a genuine science of Nature,
which shall explain the phenomena of Nature, not by means of spirits
phenomenalising in the world of the senses, but by seeing in Nature
only the natural, and in the spirit only the spiritual.

Of course, Agrippa will be entirely misunderstood if one compares _his_
natural science with that of later centuries which dispose of wholly
different experiences. In such a comparison, it might easily seem that
he was still actually and entirely referring to the direct action of
spirits, things which only depend upon natural connections or upon
mistaken experience. Such a wrong is done to him by Moriz Carrière when
he says, not in any malicious sense, it is true:

“Agrippa gives a huge list of things which belong to the Sun, the Moon,
the Planets and the fixed stars, and receive influences from them; for
instance: to the Sun are related Fire, Blood, Laurel, Gold, Chrysolite;
they confer the gifts of the Sun: Courage, Cheerfulness, and Light....
Animals have a natural sense, which, higher than human understanding,
approaches the spirit of prophecy.... Men can be bewitched to love and
hate, to sickness and health. Thieves can be bewitched so that they
cannot steal at some particular place, merchants, that they cannot do
business, mills, that they cannot work, lightning flashes, that they
cannot strike. This is brought about through drinks, salves, images,
rings, incantations; the blood of hyenas or basilisks is adapted to
such a purpose--it reminds one of Shakespeare’s witches’ cauldron.”
No; it does not remind one of that, if one understands Agrippa aright.
He believed--it goes without saying--in many facts which in his time
everybody regarded as unquestionable. But we still do the same to-day.
Or do we imagine that future centuries will not relegate much of
what we now regard as “undoubted fact” to the lumber-room of “blind”
superstition?

I am convinced that in our knowledge of facts there has been a real
progress. When once the “fact” that the earth is round had been
discovered, all previous conjectures were banished into the domain of
“superstition”; and the same holds good of certain truths of astronomy,
biology, etc. The doctrine of natural evolution constitutes an advance,
as compared with all previous “theories of creation,” similar to that
marked by the recognition of the roundness of the earth as contrasted
with all previous speculations as to its form. Nevertheless, I am
vividly conscious that in our learned scientific works and treatises
there is to be found many a “fact” which will seem to future centuries
to be just as little of a fact as much that Paracelsus and Agrippa
maintain; but the really important point is not _what_ they regarded as
“fact,” but _how_, in what spirit, they interpreted their “facts.”

In Agrippa’s time, there was little understanding or sympathy
for the “natural magic” he represented, which sought in Nature
the natural--the spiritual only in the spirit; men clung to the
“supernatural magic,” which sought the spiritual in the realm of the
sensible, and which Agrippa combated. Therefore the Abbot Trithemius
of Sponheim was right in giving him the advice to communicate his
views only as a secret teaching to a few chosen pupils who could rise
to a similar idea of Nature and spirit, because one “gives only hay
to oxen and not sugar as to singing birds.” It may be that Agrippa
himself owed to this same Abbot his own correct point of view. In his
_Steganography_, Trithemius has produced a book in which he handled
with the most subtle irony that mode of conceiving things which
confuses nature with spirit.

In this book he apparently speaks of nothing but supernatural
occurrences. Any one reading it as it stands must believe that the
author is talking of conjurations of spirits, of spirits flying through
the air, and so on. If, however, one drops certain words and letters
under the table, there remain--as Wolfgang Ernst Heidel proved in the
year 1676--letters which, combined into words, describe purely natural
occurrences. (In one case, for instance, in a formula of conjuration,
one must drop the first and last words entirely, and then cancel from
the remainder the second, fourth, sixth, and so on. In the words left
over, one must again cancel the first, third, fifth letters and so on.
One next combines what is then left into words; and the conjuration
formula resolves itself into a purely natural communication.)

How difficult it was for Agrippa to work himself free from the
prejudices of his time and to rise to a pure perception is proved by
the fact that he did not allow his “Occult Philosophy” (_Philosophia
Occulta_), already written in 1510, to appear before the year 1531,
because he considered it unripe. Further evidence of this fact is given
by his work “On the Vanity of the Sciences” (_De Vanitate Scientiarum_)
in which he speaks with bitterness of the scientific and other
activities of his time. He there states quite clearly that he has only
with difficulty wrenched himself free from the phantasy which beholds
in external actions immediate spiritual processes, in external facts
prophetic indications of the future, and so forth.

Agrippa advances to the higher knowledge in three stages. He treats
as the first stage the world as it is given for the senses, with its
substances, its physical, chemical and other forces. He calls Nature,
in so far as it is looked at on this level, “elementary Nature.” On
the second stage, one contemplates the world as a whole in its natural
interconnection, as it orders things according to measure, number,
weight, harmony, and so forth. The first stage proceeds from one thing
to the next nearest. It seeks for the causes of an occurrence in its
immediate surroundings. The second stage regards a single occurrence
in connection with the entire universe. It carries through the idea
that everything is subject to the influence of all other things in the
entire world-whole. In its eyes this world-whole appears as a vast
harmony, in which each individual item is a member. Agrippa terms the
world, regarded from this point of view, the “astral” or “heavenly”
world. The third stage of knowing is that wherein the spirit, by
plunging deep into itself, perceives immediately the spiritual, the
Root-Being of the world. Agrippa here speaks of the world, of soul and
spirit.

The views which Agrippa develops about the world, and the relation of
man to the world, present themselves to us in the case of Theophrastus
Paracelsus, in a similar manner, only in more perfected form. It is
better, therefore, to consider them in connection with the latter.

Paracelsus characterises himself aptly, when he writes under his
portrait: “None shall be another’s slave, who for himself can remain
alone.” His whole attitude towards knowledge is given in these words.
He strives everywhere to go back himself to the deepest foundations
of natural knowledge, in order to rise by his own strength to the
loftiest regions of cognition. As Physician, he will not, like his
contemporaries, simply accept what the ancient investigators, who then
counted as authorities,--Galen or Avicenna, for instance, asserted
long ago; he is resolved to read for himself directly in the book of
Nature. “The Physician must pass Nature’s examination, which is the
world, and all its origins. And the very same that Nature teaches him,
he must command to his wisdom, but seek for nothing in his wisdom, only
and alone in the light of Nature.” He shrinks from nothing, in order
to learn to know Nature and her workings in all directions. For this
purpose he made journeys to Sweden, Hungary, Spain, Portugal, and the
East. He can truly say of himself: “I have followed the Art at the
risk of my life, and have not been ashamed to learn from wanderers,
executioners and sheep-shearers. My doctrine was tested more severely
than silver in poverty, fears, wars and hardships.”

What has been handed down by ancient authorities has for him no value,
for he believes that he can attain to the right view only if he
himself experiences the upward climb from the knowledge of Nature to
the highest insight. This living, personal experience puts into his
mouth the proud utterance: “He who will follow truth, must come into
my monarchy.... After me; not I after you, Avicenna, Rhases, Galen,
Mesur! After me; not I after you, O ye of Paris, ye of Montpellier, ye
of Swabia, ye of Meissen, ye of Cologne, ye of Vienna and of what lies
on the Danube and the Rhine; ye islands in the sea, thou Italy, thou
Dalmatia, thou Athens, thou Greek, thou Arab, thou Israelite; after me,
not I after you! Mine is the Monarchy.”

It is easy to misunderstand Paracelsus because of his rough exterior,
which sometimes conceals a deep earnestness behind a jest. Does he
not himself say: “By nature I am not subtly woven, nor brought up on
figs and wheat-bread, but on cheese, milk and rye-bread, wherefore I
may well be rude with the over-clean and superfine; for those who were
brought up in soft clothing and we who were bred in pine needles do not
easily understand one another. When in myself I mean to be kindly, I
must therefore often be taken as rude. How can I not be strange to one
who has never wandered in the sun?”

In his book about Winkelmann, Goethe has described the relation of
man to Nature in the following beautiful sentence: “When the healthy
nature of man acts as a whole; when he feels himself as one with a
great, beautiful, noble and worthy whole; when the sense of harmonious
well-being gives him a pure and free delight; then would the Universe,
if it could be conscious of its own feeling, burst forth in joy at
having attained its goal, and contemplate with wondering admiration the
summit of its own becoming and being.” With a feeling such as finds
expression in these sentences, Paracelsus is simply saturated. From out
of its depths the riddle of humanity takes shape for him. Let us watch
how this happens in Paracelsus’s sense.

At the outset, the road by which Nature has travelled to attain her
loftiest altitude is hidden from man’s power of comprehension. She
has climbed, indeed, to the summit; but the summit does not proclaim:
I feel myself as the whole of Nature; it proclaims, on the contrary:
I feel myself as this single, separated human being. That which in
reality is an achievement of the whole universe, feels itself as a
separated, isolated being, standing alone by itself. This indeed is
the true being of man, _viz._, that he must needs feel himself to
be something quite different from what, in ultimate analysis, he
really is. And if that be a contradiction, then must man be called a
contradiction come to life.

Man is the universe in his own particular way; he regards his oneness
with the universe as a duality: he is the very same that the universe
is; but he is the universe as a repetition, as a single being. This
is the contrast which Paracelsus feels as the Microcosm (Man) and the
Macrocosm (Universe). Man, for him, is the universe in miniature. That
which makes man regard his relationship to the world in this way, that
is his spirit. This spirit appears as if bound to a single being, to a
single organism: and this organism belongs, by the very nature of its
whole being, to the mighty stream of the universe. It is one member,
one link in that whole, having its very existence only in relation
with all the other links or members thereof. But spirit appears as
an outcome of this single, separated organism, and sees itself at
the outset as bound up only with that organism. It tears loose this
organism from the mother earth out of which it has grown. So, for
Paracelsus, a deep-seated connection between man and the universe lies
hidden in the basic foundations of being, a connection which is hidden
through the presence of “spirit.” That spirit which leads us to higher
insight by making knowledge possible, and leads on this knowledge to a
new birth on a higher level--this has, as its first result for us men,
to veil from us our own oneness with the whole.

Thus the nature of man resolves itself for Paracelsus in the first
place into three factors: our sensuous-physical nature, our organism
which appears to us as a natural being among other natural beings and
is of like nature with all other natural beings; our concealed or
hidden nature, which is a link in the chain of the whole universe, and
therefore is not shut up within the organism or limited to it, but
radiates and receives the workings of energy upon and from the entire
universe; and our highest nature, our spirit, which lives its life in
a purely spiritual manner. The first factor in man’s nature Paracelsus
calls the “elementary body”; the second, the ethereal-heavenly, or
“astral body”; and the third he names “the Soul.”

Thus in the “astral” phenomena, Paracelsus recognises an intermediate
stage between the purely physical and the properly spiritual or
soul-phenomena. Therefore these astral activities will come into view
when the spirit or soul, which veils or conceals the natural basis
of our being, suspends its activity. In the dream-world we see the
simplest phenomena of this realm. The pictures which hover before us in
dreams, with their remarkably significant connection with occurrences
in our environment and with states of our inner nature, are products
of our natural basis or root-being, which are obscured by the brighter
light of the soul. For example, when a chair falls over beside my bed
and I dream a whole drama ending with a shot fired in a duel; or when I
have palpitation of the heart and dream of a boiling cauldron, we can
see that in these dreams natural operations come to light which are
full of sense and meaning, and disclose a life lying between the purely
organic functions and the concept-forming activity which is carried on
in the full, clear consciousness of the spirit. Connected with this
region are all the phenomena belonging to the domain of hypnotism and
suggestion; and in the latter are we not compelled to recognise an
interaction between human beings, which points to some connection or
relation between beings in Nature, which is normally hidden by the
higher activity of the mind? From this starting point we can reach an
understanding of what Paracelsus meant by the “astral” body. It is the
sum total of those natural operations under whose influence we stand,
or may in special circumstances come to stand, or which proceed from
us, without our souls or minds coming into consideration in connection
with them, but which yet cannot be included under the concept of purely
physical phenomena. The fact that Paracelsus reckons as truths in this
domain things which we doubt to-day, does not come into the question,
from the point of view which I have already described.

Starting from the basis of these views as to the nature of man,
Paracelsus divides him into seven factors or principles, which are the
same as those we also find in the wisdom of the ancient Egyptians,
among the Neoplatonists and in the Kabbalah. In the first place, man
is a physical-bodily being, and therefore subject to the same laws
as every other body. He is, in this respect, therefore, a purely
“elementary” body. The purely physical-bodily laws combine into an
organic life-process, and Paracelsus denotes this organic sequence of
law by the terms “_archæus_” or “_spiritus vitæ_.” Next, the organic
rises into a region of phenomena resembling the spiritual, but which
are not yet properly spiritual, and these he classifies as “astral”
phenomena. From amidst these astral phenomena, the functions of the
“animal soul” make their appearance. Man becomes a being of the senses.

Then he connects together his sense impressions according to their
nature, by his understanding or mind, and the “human soul” or
“reasoning soul” becomes alive in him. He sinks himself deep into his
own mental productions, and learns to recognise “spirit” as such, and
thus he has risen at length to the level of the “spiritual soul.”
Finally, he must come to recognise that in this spiritual soul he is
experiencing the ultimate basis of universal being; the spiritual soul
ceases to be individual, to be separated. Then arises the knowledge
of which Eckhart spoke when he felt no longer that _he_ was speaking
within himself, but that in him the Root-Being was uttering Itself.
The condition has come about in which the All-Spirit in man beholds
Itself. Paracelsus has stamped the feeling of this condition with the
simple words: “And that is a great thing whereon to dwell: there is
naught in heaven or upon earth that is not in Man. And God who dwelleth
in Heaven, He also is in Man.”

With these seven principles of human nature, Paracelsus aims at
expressing nothing else than the facts of inner and outer experience.
The fact remains unquestioned that, what for human experience
subdivides itself into a multiplicity of seven factors, is in higher
reality a unity. But the higher insight exists just for the very
purpose of exhibiting the unity in all that appears as multiplicity
to man, owing to his bodily and spiritual organisation. On the level
of the highest insight, Paracelsus strives to the utmost to fuse the
unitary Root-Being of the world with his own spirit. But he knows that
man can only cognise Nature in its spirituality, when he enters into
immediate intercourse with that Nature. Man does not grasp Nature by
peopling it from within himself with arbitrarily assumed entities; but
by accepting and valuing it as it is, as Nature. Paracelsus therefore
does not seek for God or for spirit in Nature; but Nature, just as it
comes before his eyes, is for him wholly, immediately divine. Must one
then first ascribe to the plant a soul after the kind of a human soul,
in order to find the spiritual?

Hence Paracelsus explains to himself the development of things, so far
as that is possible with the scientific means of his age, altogether
in such wise that he conceives this development as a sensible-natural
process. He makes all things to proceed from the root-matter, the
root-water (Yliaster). And he regards as a further natural process the
separation of the root-matter (which he also calls the great Limbus)
into the four elements: Water, Earth, Fire and Air. When he says that
the “Divine Word” called forth the multiplicity of beings from the
root-matter, one must understand this also only in such wise as perhaps
in more recent natural science one must understand the relationship
of Force to Matter. A “Spirit,” in a matter-of-fact sense, is not yet
present at this stage. This “Spirit” is no matter-of-fact basis of the
natural process, but a matter-of-fact result of that process.

This Spirit does not create Nature, but develops itself out of Nature.
Not a few statements of Paracelsus might be interpreted in the opposite
sense. Thus when he says: “There is nothing which does not possess and
carry with it also a spirit hidden in it and that lives not withal.
Also, not only has _that_ life, which stirs itself and moves, as men,
animals, the worms in the earth, the birds in the sky and the fishes in
water, but all bodily and actual things as well.”

But in such sayings Paracelsus only aims at warning us against that
superficial contemplation of Nature which fancies it can exhaust the
being of a thing with a couple of “stuck-up” concepts, according to
Goethe’s apt expression. He aims not at putting into things some
imaginary being, but at setting in motion all the powers of man to
bring out that which in actual fact lies in the thing.

What matters is not to let oneself be misled by the fact that
Paracelsus expresses himself in the spirit of his time. It is far more
important to recognise what things really hovered before his mind when,
looking upon Nature, he expresses his ideas in the forms of expression
proper to his age. He ascribes to man, for instance, a dual flesh, that
is, a dual bodily constitution. “The flesh must also be understood,
that it is of two kinds, namely the flesh that comes from Adam and the
flesh which is not from Adam. The flesh from Adam is a gross flesh,
for it is earthly and nothing besides flesh, that can be bound and
grasped like wood and stone. The other flesh is not from Adam, it is
a subtle flesh and cannot be bound or grasped, for it is not made of
earth.” What is the flesh that is from Adam? It is everything that man
has received through natural development, everything, therefore, that
has passed on to him by heredity. To that is added, whatever man has
acquired for himself in his intercourse with the world around him in
the course of time.

The modern scientific conceptions of inherited characteristics and
those acquired by adaptation easily emerge from the above-cited thought
of Paracelsus. The “more subtle flesh” that makes man capable of his
intellectual activities, has not existed from the beginning in man.
Man was “gross flesh” like the animal, a flesh that “can be bound and
grasped like wood and stone.” In a scientific sense, therefore, the
soul is also an acquired characteristic of the “gross flesh.” What
the scientist of the nineteenth century has in his mind’s eye when he
speaks of the factors inherited from the animal world, is just what
Paracelsus has in view when he uses the expression, “the flesh that
comes from Adam.”

Naturally I have not the least intention of blurring the difference
that exists between a scientist of the sixteenth and one of the
nineteenth century. It was, indeed, this latter century which for
the first time was able to see, in the full scientific sense, the
phenomena of living beings in such a connection that their natural
relationship and actual descent, right up to man, stood out clearly
before one’s eyes. Science sees only a natural process where Linnæus
in the eighteenth century saw a spiritual process and characterised it
in the words: “There are counted as many species of living beings, as
there were created different forms in the beginning.” While thus in
Linnæus’s time, the Spirit had still to be transferred into the spacial
world and have assigned to it the task of spiritually generating
the forms of life, or “creating” them: the natural science of the
nineteenth century could give to Nature what belonged to Nature, and
to Spirit what belonged to Spirit. To Nature is even assigned the task
of explaining her own creations; and the Spirit can plunge into itself
there, where alone it is to be found, in the inner being of man.

But although in a certain sense Paracelsus thinks according to the
spirit of his age, yet he has grasped the relationship of man to Nature
in a profound manner, especially in relation to the idea of Evolution,
of Becoming. He did not see in the Root-Being of the universe something
which in any sense is there as a finished thing, but he grasped the
Divine in the process of Becoming. Thereby he was enabled truly to
ascribe to man a self-creative activity. For if the divine root of
being is, as it were, given once for all, then there can be no question
of any truly creative activity in man. It is not man, living in time,
who then creates, but it is God, who is from Eternity, that creates.
But for Paracelsus there is no such God from Eternity. For him there
is only an eternal happening, and man is one link in this eternal
happening. What man forms, was previously in no sense existent. What
man creates, is, as he creates it, a new, original creation. If it is
to be called divine, it can only be so-called in the sense in which it
is a human creation. Therefore Paracelsus can assign to man a rôle in
the building of the universe, which makes him a co-architect in its
creation. The divine root of being is _without_ man, not that which it
is _with_ man.

“For nature brings nothing to light, which as such is perfect, but
man must make it perfect.” This self-creative activity of man in the
building of the universe is what Paracelsus calls Alchemy. “This
perfecting is Alchemy. Thus the Alchemist is the baker, when he bakes
bread, the vintager, when he makes wine, the weaver, when he makes
cloth.” Paracelsus aims at being an Alchemist in his own domain as a
Physician. “Therefore I may well write so much here about Alchemy, that
ye may well understand it, and experience that which it is and how
it is to be understood; and not find a stumbling-block therein that
neither Gold nor Silver shall come to thee therefrom. But have regard
thereunto, that the Arcana [curative means] be revealed unto thee....
The third pillar of medicine is Alchemy, for the preparation of the
medicines cannot come to pass without it, because Nature cannot be made
use of without Art.”

In the strictest sense, therefore, the eyes of Paracelsus are directed
to Nature, in order to overhear from herself what she has to say about
that which she brings forth. He seeks to explore the laws of chemistry,
so that, in his sense, he may work as an Alchemist. He pictures
to himself all bodies as compounded out of three root-substances:
Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury. What he thus names, naturally does not
coincide with that which later chemistry solely and strictly calls
by these names; just as little as that which Paracelsus conceives of
as the root-substance is such in the sense of our later chemistry.
Different things are called by the same names at different times.
What the ancients called the four elements: Earth, Water, Air, and
Fire, we still have to-day. But we call these four “elements” no
longer “elements,” but states of aggregation and have for them the
designations: solid, liquid, gaseous and etheric. The Earth, for
instance, was for the ancients not earth, but the “solid.”

Again, we can clearly recognise the three root-substances of Paracelsus
in contemporary conceptions, though not in present names of like sound.
For Paracelsus, dissolution in a liquid and burning are the two most
important chemical processes which he utilises. If a body be dissolved
or burnt, it breaks up into its parts. Something remains behind as
insoluble; something dissolves, or is burnt. What is left behind is
to him of the nature of Salt; the soluble (liquid) of the nature of
Mercury; while he terms Sulphur-like the part that can be burnt.

All this, taken as relating to material things, may leave the man cold
who cannot look out beyond such natural processes; whoever seeks at all
costs to grasp the spirit with his senses, will people these processes
with all sorts of ensouling beings. He, however, who like Paracelsus
knows how to regard them in connection with the whole, which permits
its secret to become revealed in man’s inner being,--he accepts them,
as the senses offer them; he does not first re-interpret them; for just
as the occurrences of Nature lie before us in their sensible reality,
so too do they, in their own way, reveal to us the riddle of existence.
That which through their sensible reality they have to unveil from
within the soul of man, stands, for him who strives after the light of
higher knowledge, far higher than all supernatural wonders that man
can invent or get revealed to him about their suppositious “spirit.”
There is no “Spirit of Nature,” capable of uttering loftier truths
than the mighty works of Nature herself, when our soul links itself
in friendship with that Nature and listens to the revelations of her
secrets in intimate and tender intercourse. Such friendship with Nature
was what Paracelsus sought.




                   VALENTINE WEIGEL AND JACOB BOEHME

In the view of Paracelsus, what mattered most was to acquire ideas
about Nature which should breathe the spirit of the higher insight
that he represented. A thinker related to him, who applied the same
mode of conceiving things to his own nature especially, is VALENTINE
WEIGEL (1533-1588). He grew up out of Protestant theology in a like
sense to that in which Eckhart, Tauler, and Suso grew up out of Roman
Catholic theology. He has predecessors in Sebastian Frank and Caspar
Schwenckfeldt. These two, as contrasted with the orthodox Churchmen
clinging to external profession, pointed downwards to the deepening of
the inner life. For them it is not that Jesus whom the Gospels preach
who is of value, but the Christ who can be born in every man as his
deeper nature, and become for him the Saviour from the lower life and
the guide to ideal uplifting.

Weigel performed silently and humbly the duties of his office as
clergyman in Zschopau. It was only from the writings he left behind,
printed first in the seventeenth century, that the world learned
anything of the significant ideas which had come to him about the
nature of man.[15]

  [15] The following, from among his writings, may be named: _Der
  güldene Griff, das ist alle Ding ohne Irrthumb zu erkennen, vielen
  Hochgelehrten unbekandt, und doch allen Menschen nothwendig zu
  wissen; Erkenne dich selbst; Vom Ort der Welt._

Weigel feels himself driven to gain a clear understanding of his
relation to the teaching of the Church; and that leads him on further
to investigate the basic foundations of all knowledge. Whether man can
know anything through a confession of faith, is a question as to which
he can only give himself an account when he knows _how_ man knows.
Weigel starts from the lowest kind of knowing. He asks himself: How do
I know a sensible object, when it presents itself before me? Thence he
hopes to be able to mount upwards to a point of view whence he can give
himself an account of the highest knowledge.

In cognition through the senses, the instrument (the sense-organ) and
the object, the “counterpart” (_Gegenwurf_) stand opposed. “Since
in natural perception there must be two things, as the object or
‘counterpart,’ which is to be known and seen by the eye; and the eye,
or the perceiver, which sees or knows the object, so do thou hold
over against each other: whether the knowledge comes forth from the
object to the eye; or whether the judgment, or the cognition, flows out
from the eye into the object.”[16] Weigel now says to himself: If the
cognition (or knowledge) flowed from the “counterpart” (or thing) into
the eye, then of necessity from one and the same thing a similar and
perfect cognition must come to all eyes. But that is not the case, for
each man sees according to the measure of his own eyes. Only the eyes,
not the “counterpart” (or object) can be in fault, in that various and
different conceptions are possible of one and the same thing. To clear
up the matter, Weigel compares seeing with reading. If the book were
not there, I naturally could not read it; but it might still be there,
and yet I could read nothing in it, if I did not understand the art of
reading. The book therefore must be there; but, from itself it can give
me not the smallest thing; I must draw forth everything I read from
within myself. That is also the nature of sensible perception. Colour
is there as the “counterpart,” but it can give the eye nothing from out
of itself. The eye must recognise, from out of itself, what colour is.
As little as the content of the book is in the reader, just so little
is colour in the eye. If the content of the book were in the reader, he
would not need to read it. Yet in reading, this content does not flow
out from the book, but from the reader. So is it also with the sensible
object. What the sensible thing before him is; that does not flow from
outside into the man, but from within outwards.

  [16] _Der güldene Griff_, p. 26 et seq.

Starting from these thoughts, one might say: If all knowledge flows
out from man into the object, then one does not know what is in the
object, but only what is in man. The detailed working out of this line
of thought, brought about the view of Immanuel Kant (1724-1804).[17]

  [17] The error in this line of thought will be found explained in my
  book, _The Philosophy of Freedom_, Berlin, 1894. Here I must limit
  myself to mentioning that Valentine Weigel, with his simple, robust
  way of conceiving things, stands far higher than Kant.

Weigel says to himself: Even if the knowledge flows out from man, it
is still only the being of the “counterpart” (or object) which comes
to light in this indirect way through man. As I learn the content of
the book by reading it, and not by my own content, so also I learn
the colour of the “counterpart” through the eye, not any colour to
be found in the eye, or in myself. (Thus Weigel arrives by a road of
his own at a result that we have already encountered in Nicholas of
Cusa. Cp. pages 151-160). In this way Weigel attained to clearness as
to the nature of sense-perception. He arrived at the conviction that
everything which external things have to tell us can only flow forth
from our own inner nature itself. Man cannot remain passive when he
tries to know sensible objects and seeks merely to allow them to act
upon him; but he must assume an active attitude, and bring forth the
knowledge from within himself. The counterpart (or object) merely
awakens the knowledge in the spirit. Man rises to higher knowledge when
his spirit becomes its own “counterpart.” One can see from sensible
cognition that no cognition can flow into man from outside. Therefore
there can be no such thing as an external revelation, but only an inner
awakening.

As now the external counterpart waits till there comes into its
presence man, in whom it can express its being, so too must man wait,
when he seeks to be his own “counterpart” (or object) until the
knowledge of his own being shall be awakened in him. If, in cognition
through the senses, man must assume an active attitude in order that
he may bring to meet the “counterpart” its own being, so in the higher
knowing, man must hold himself passive, because he is himself now the
“counterpart.” He must admit its being into himself. Therefore the
cognition of the spirit appears to him as enlightenment from above. In
contrast to cognition through the senses, Weigel therefore terms the
higher cognition the “Light of Mercy” This “Light of Mercy” is, in
reality, nothing other than the self-knowledge of the spirit in man, or
the re-birth of knowledge on the higher level of beholding.

Now just as Nicholas of Cusa, in following up his road from knowing to
beholding, does not really bring about the re-birth of the knowledge
he has gained, on the higher level, but only the faith of the Church
in which he was brought up appears deceptively before him as such a
re-birth, so is it also the case with Weigel. He guides himself to the
right road, but loses it again in the very moment in which he steps
upon it. He who will travel the road that Weigel points out, can regard
the latter as his guide only as far as the starting-point.

       *       *       *       *       *

What rings out to meet us from the works of the Master-Shoemaker of
Görlitz, JACOB BOEHME (1575-1624), sounds like the joyous outburst of
Nature admiring her own being upon the summit of her evolution. A man
appears before us whose words have wings, woven out of the inspiring
feeling of having seen knowledge shining within him as Higher Wisdom.
Jacob Boehme describes his own state as Piety which strives only to be
Wisdom, and as a Wisdom that seeks to live only in Piety: “As I was
wrestling and fighting in God’s behalf, behold a wondrous light shone
into my soul, such as was quite foreign to savage nature; therein I
first knew what God and man were, and what God had to do with men.”

Jacob Boehme no longer feels himself as a separated being expressing
its insights; he feels himself as an organ of the great All-Spirit,
speaking in him. The limits of his personality do not appear to him as
the limits of the Spirit that speaks from within him. This Spirit is
for him present everywhere. He knows that “the Sophist will blame him”
when he speaks of the beginning of the world and its creation: “the
while I was not thereby and did not myself see it. To him be it said
that in the essence of my soul and body, when I was not yet the ‘I,’
but when I was still Adam’s essence, I was there present and myself
squandered away my glory in Adam.”

Only in external similes is Boehme able to indicate how the light broke
forth in his inner being. When once as a boy he finds himself on the
top of a mountain, he sees above him a place where large red stones
seem to shut up the mountain; the entrance is open and in its depth he
sees a vessel full of gold. A shudder runs through him; and he goes on
his way without touching the treasure. Later on he is apprenticed to
a shoemaker in Görlitz. A stranger steps into the shop and demands a
pair of shoes. Boehme is not allowed to sell them in the absence of his
master. The stranger departs, but after a while calls the apprentice
out of the shop and says to him: “Jacob, thou art little, but thou wilt
some day become quite another man, over whom the world will break out
into wonder.” In riper years, Jacob Boehme sees the reflection of the
bright sun in a tin vessel: the view that thus presents itself to him
seems to him to unveil a profound secret. Even after the impression of
this appearance, he believes himself to be in possession of the key to
the riddles of Nature.

He lives as a spiritual anchorite, humbly earning his living by his
trade, and between whiles, as though for his own recollection, he notes
down the harmonies which resound in his inner being when he feels the
Spirit in himself. The zealotry of priestly fervour makes life hard
for the man; he, who desires naught but to read the Scripture which
the light of his inner nature illuminates for him, is persecuted and
tortured by those to whom only the external writ, the rigid, dogmatic
confession of faith, is accessible.

One world-riddle remains as a disquieting presence in Jacob Boehme’s
soul, driving him on to knowledge. He believes himself to be in his
spirit enfolded in a divine harmony; but when he looks around him, he
sees discord everywhere in the divine workings. To man belongs the
light of Wisdom; and yet he is exposed to error; in him lives the
impulse to the good, and yet the discord of evil sounds throughout
the whole of human development. Nature is governed by its own great
laws; yet its harmony is disturbed by happenings of no purport, and
the warfare of the elements. How is this discord in the harmonious
world-whole to be understood? This question tortures Jacob Boehme. It
strides into the centre of the world of his thought. He strives to gain
a view of the world as a whole, which shall include the discordant.
For how can a conception which leaves the actual present discord
unexplained explain the world? The discord must be explained out of the
harmony, the evil out of the good itself. Let us restrict ourselves,
in speaking of these things, to the good and the evil, wherein the
lack of harmony in the narrower sense finds its expression. For,
fundamentally, Jacob Boehme also restricts himself to this. He can do
so, for Nature and man appear to him as a single entity. He sees in
both similar laws and processes. The purposeless seems to him an evil
something in Nature, just as evil seems to him something purposeless in
man. Similar fundamental forces rule both here and there. To one who
has known the origin of evil in man, the source of evil in Nature also
lies open and clear.

Now, how can the evil as well as the good flow forth from the very
same Root-Being? Speaking in Jacob Boehme’s sense, one would give
the following answer. The Root-Being does not live out its existence
in itself. The multiplicity of the world shares in this existence.
As the human body lives its life, not as a single member, but as a
multiplicity of members, so also the Root-Being. And as human life is
poured out into this multiplicity of members, so too the Root-Being
is poured out into the manifoldness of the things of this world. As
true as it is that the entire man has only one life, so true is it
that every member has its own life. And as little as it contradicts
the whole harmonious life of a man, that his hand should turn itself
against his own body and wound it, so little is it impossible that the
things of the world, which live the life of the Root-Being in their own
way, should turn themselves against each other. Thus the Root-Being, in
dividing itself among different lives, confers upon each such life the
capacity to turn itself against the whole.

It is not from the good that evil streams forth, but from the way in
which the good lives. As the light is only able to shine when it
pierces the darkness, so the good can bring itself to life only when it
permeates its opposite. From out of the “fathomless abyss” of darkness
there streams forth the light; from the “groundlessness” of the
indifferent there is brought to birth the Good. And as in the shadow
only the brightening demands a pointing to the light; but the darkness,
as a matter of course, is felt as that which weakens the light; so too
in the world, it is only the law-abiding character that is sought for
in all things; and the evil, the purposeless, is accepted as a matter
of course, intelligible in itself. Thus, in spite of the fact that for
Jacob Boehme the Root-Being is the All, still nothing in the world can
be understood, unless one has an eye both to the Root-Being and its
opposite at once. “The good has swallowed up into itself the evil or
the hideous.... Every being has in itself good and evil, and in its
unfoldment, as it passes over into division, it becomes a contradiction
of qualities, as one seeks to overcome the other.”

Hence it is altogether in accordance with Jacob Boehme’s view to see
in everything, and in every process of the world, both good and evil;
but it is not in accord with his meaning, without more ado to seek
the Root-Being in the mingling of good and evil. The Root-Being must
swallow up the evil; but the evil is not a part of the Root-Being.
Jacob Boehme seeks the Root-Being of the world; but the world itself
has sprung forth from the “fathomless abyss” through the Root-Being.
“The external world is not God, and eternally will not be called God,
but only a being wherein God manifests Himself.... When one says: God
is all, God is heaven and earth, and also the outer world, so is that
true: for from him and in him all stands originally rooted. But what am
I to do with such a saying, which is no religion?”

With such a view in the background, Jacob Boehme’s conceptions as
to the being of the whole world built themselves up in his mind, so
that he makes the orderly world emerge in a series of steps from the
“fathomless abyss.” This world builds itself up in seven natural forms.
In dark astringency the Root-Being receives form, dumbly shut up within
itself and motionless. This astringency Boehme grasps under the symbol
of Salt. In employing such designations he leans upon Paracelsus, who
had borrowed from chemical processes his names for the processes of
Nature. By swallowing up its opposite, the first nature-form passes
over into the form of the second; the astringent, the motionless, takes
on movement; Power and Life enter into it. Quicksilver (Mercury) is
the symbol for this second form. In the struggle of Rest and Motion,
of Death with Life, the third form of Nature unveils itself (Sulphur).
This Life battling within itself, becomes manifest to itself; it lives
thenceforward no longer an outer battle of its members; there quivers
through it as it were a unifying glowing flash, itself lighting up
its own being (Fire). This fourth form of Nature rises to the fifth,
the living battle of the parts resting in themselves (Water). On this
level, as upon the first, there is present an inner astringency and
dumbness; only it is not an absolute rest, a silence of the inner
opposites, but an interior movement of the opposites. It is not the
motionless resting in itself, but the moved, that which has been
kindled by the fire-flash of the fourth stage. Upon the sixth level,
the Root-Being itself becomes aware of itself as such inner life.
Living beings endowed with senses represent this form of Nature.
Jacob Boehme calls it the “Clang” or Call, and in so doing adopts
the sense-perception of sound as the symbol for sense-perception in
general. The seventh form of Nature is the Spirit, raising itself on
the basis of its sense-perceptions (Wisdom). He finds himself again as
himself, as the Root-Being, within the world that has grown up out of
the “fathomless abyss,” shaping itself out of the harmonious and the
discordant. “The Holy Ghost brings the Glory of this Majesty into the
being, wherein the Godhead stands revealed.”

It is with such views that Jacob Boehme seeks to fathom that world
which for him, according to the knowledge of his time, was reckoned as
the actual world of fact. For him all is fact which is so regarded by
the natural science of his time and by the Bible. His way of conceiving
things is one thing, his world of facts quite another. One can imagine
the former applied to a totally different knowledge of facts. And thus
there appears before our eyes a Jacob Boehme as he might stand at the
parting of the nineteenth and the twentieth centuries. Such a one would
not saturate with his way of conceiving things the six days’ creation
work of the Bible and the fight of the angels and the devils, but
Lyell’s geological knowledge and the facts of Haeckel’s _The History
of Creation_. He who can penetrate into the spirit of Jacob Boehme’s
writings must arrive at this conviction.[18]

  [18] We may here name the most important of Boehme’s writings: _Die
  Morgenröthe im Aufgang_; _Die drei Prinzipien göttlichen Lebens
  oder über das dreifache Leben des Menschen_; _Das umgewandte Auge_;
  _“Signatura rerum” oder von der Geburt und Bezeichnung aller Wesen_;
  _Das “Mysterium Magnum_.”




                  GIORDANO BRUNO AND ANGELUS SILESIUS

In the first decennium of the sixteenth century, the scientific
genius of Nicholas Copernicus (1473-1543) thinks out in the castle of
Heilsberg, in Prussia, an intellectual structure which compels the
men of subsequent epochs to look up to the starry heavens with other
conceptions than those which their forefathers in antiquity and the
Middle Ages had. To them the earth was their dwelling-place, at rest in
the centre of the Universe. The stars, however, were for them beings of
a perfect nature, whose motion took place in circles because the circle
is the representative of perfection.

In that which the stars showed to human senses they beheld something of
the nature of soul, something spiritual. It was one kind of speech that
the things and processes upon earth spoke to man; quite another, that
of the shining stars, beyond the moon in the pure æther, which seemed
like some spiritual nature filling space. Nicholas of Cusa had already
formed other ideas.

Through Copernicus, earth became for man a brother-being in face of the
other heavenly bodies, a star moving like others. All the difference
that earth has to show for man he could now reduce to this: that earth
is his dwelling-place. He was no longer forced to think differently
about the events of this earth and those of the rest of universal
space. The world of his senses had expanded itself into the most remote
spaces. He was compelled henceforth to allow that which penetrated his
eye from the æther to count as sense-world just as much as the things
of earth. He could no longer seek in the æther in sensuous fashion for
the Spirit.

Whoever, henceforth, strove after higher knowledge, must needs come to
an understanding with this expanded world of the senses. In earlier
centuries, the brooding mind of man stood before a world of facts. Now
he was confronted with a new task. No longer could the things of earth
only express this nature from within man’s inner being. This inner
nature of his was called on to embrace the spirit of a sense-world,
which fills the All of Space everywhere alike.

The thinker of Nola, PHILOTHEO GIORDANO BRUNO (1548-1600) found himself
faced by such a problem. The senses have conquered the universe of
space; henceforth the Spirit is no more to be found in space. Thus man
was guided from without to seek henceforward for the Spirit there alone
where from out of profound inner experiences those glorious thinkers
sought it, whose ranks our previous expositions have led before us.
These thinkers drew upon a view of the world to which, later on, the
advance of natural knowledge forces humanity. The sun of those ideas,
which later should shine upon a new view of Nature, with them still
stands below the horizon; but their light already appears as the early
dawn at a time when men’s thoughts of Nature itself still lay in the
darkness of night.

The sixteenth century gave the heavenly spaces to natural science
for the sense-world to which it rightfully belongs; by the end of
the nineteenth century, this science had advanced so far that, even
within the phenomena of plant, animal, and human life, it could assign
to the world of sensible facts that which belongs to it. Neither,
then, in the æther above, nor in the development of living creatures,
can this natural science henceforth seek for anything but sensible,
matter-of-fact processes. As the thinker in the sixteenth century
had to say: “The earth is a star among other stars, subject to the
same laws as other stars”; so must the thinker of the nineteenth
century say: “Man, whatever may be his origin and his future, is
for anthropology only a mammal, and further, that mammal whose
organisation, needs and diseases are the most complex, whose brain,
with its marvellous capacities, has reached the highest level of
development.”[19]

  [19] Paul Topinard: _Anthropologie_, Leipzig, 1888, p. 528.

From such a standpoint, attained through natural science, there can
no longer occur any confusion between the spiritual and the sensible,
provided man understands himself rightly. Developed natural science
makes it impossible to seek in Nature for a Spirit conceived of after
the fashion of something material, just as healthy thinking makes
it impossible to seek for the reason of the forward movement of the
clock-hand, not in mechanical laws (the Spirit of inorganic Nature),
but in a special Daimon, supposed to bring about the movements of the
hands. Ernst Haeckel was quite right in rejecting, as a scientist, the
gross conception of a God conceived of in material fashion. “In the
higher and more abstract forms of religion, the bodily appearance is
abandoned and God is worshipped as pure Spirit, devoid of body. ‘God
is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and
in truth.’ But, nevertheless, the soul-activity of this pure Spirit
remains quite the same as that of the anthropomorphic personal God. In
reality, even this immaterial Spirit is not thought of as bodiless, but
as invisible, like a gas. We thus arrive at the paradoxical conception
of God as a gaseous vertebrate.”[20]

  [20] Haeckel, _Riddle of the Universe_.

In reality, the matter-of-fact, sensible existence of something
spiritual may be assumed only when immediate sensible experience shows
something spiritual, and only such a degree of the spiritual may be
assumed as can be perceived in this manner. That first rate thinker, B.
Carneri, ventured to say (in his book: _Empfindung und Bewusstsein_,
p. 15): “The dictum: No spirit without matter, but also no matter
without spirit,--would entitle us to extend the question to the plant
also, nay, even to any block of stone taken at random, wherein there
seems very little to speak in favour of these correlative conceptions.”
Spiritual occurrences as matters of fact are the results of various
doings of an organism; the Spirit of the world is not present in the
world in a material sense, but precisely after a spiritual fashion.
Man’s soul is a sum of processes in which Spirit appears most
immediately as fact. In the form of such a soul, however, Spirit is
present in man only. And it implies that one misunderstands Spirit,
that one commits the worst sin against Spirit, to seek for Spirit in
the form of Soul elsewhere than in man, to imagine other beings thus
ensouled as man is. Whoever does this, only shows that he has not
experienced Spirit within himself; he has only experienced that outer
form of appearance of Spirit, the Soul, which reigns in him. But that
is just the same as though one regarded a circle drawn with a pencil as
the real, mathematically ideal circle. Whoever experiences in himself
nothing other than the soul-form of the Spirit, feels himself thereupon
driven to assume also such a soul-form in non-human things, in order
that thereby he may not need to remain rooted in the materiality of
the gross senses. Instead of thinking of the Root-Being of the world
as Spirit, he thinks of it as World-Soul, and postulates a general
ensoulment of Nature.

Giordano Bruno, upon whom the new Copernican view of Nature forced
itself, could grasp Spirit in the world, from which it had been
expelled in its old form, in no other manner than as World-Soul. On
plunging into Bruno’s writings (especially his deeply thoughtful book:
_De Rerum Principiis et Elementis et Causis_) one gets the impression
that he thought of things as ensouled, although in varying degree. He
has not, in reality, experienced in himself the Spirit, therefore he
conceives Spirit after the fashion of the human soul, wherein alone he
has encountered it. When he speaks of Spirit, he conceives of it in
the following way: “The universal reason is the inmost, most effective
and most special capacity, and a potential part of the World-Soul; it
is something one and identical, which fills the All, illuminates the
universe and instructs Nature how to bring forth her species as they
ought to be.” In these sentences Spirit, it is true, is not described
as a “gaseous vertebrate,” but it is described as a being that is like
to the human soul. “Let now a thing be as small and tiny as you please,
it yet has within it a portion of spiritual substance, which, when it
finds a substratum adapted thereto, reaches out to become a plant, an
animal, and organises itself to any body you choose that is ordinarily
called ensouled. For Spirit is to be found in all things, and there
does not exist even the tiniest little body which does not embrace in
itself such a share thereof as causes it to come to life.”

Because Giordano Bruno had not really experienced the Spirit, as
Spirit, in himself, he could therefore confuse the life of the Spirit
with the external mechanical processes, wherewith Raymond Lully
(1235-1315) wanted to unveil the secrets of the Spirit in his so-called
“Great Art” (_Ars Magna_). A recent philosopher, Franz Brentano,
describes this “Great Art” thus: “Concepts were to be inscribed upon
concentric, separately revolving discs, and then the most varied
combinations produced by turning them about.” Whatever chance brings
up in the turning of these discs, was shaped into a judgment about the
highest truths. And Giordano Bruno, in his manifold wanderings through
Europe, made his appearance at various seats of learning as a teacher
of this “Great Art.” He possessed the daring courage to think of the
stars as worlds, perfectly analogous to our earth; he widened the
outlook of scientific thinking beyond the confines of earth; he thought
of the heavenly bodies no longer as bodily spirits; but he still
thought of them as soul-like spirits. One must not be unjust towards
the man whom the Catholic Church caused to pay with death the penalty
for his advanced way of thinking. It required something gigantic to
harness the whole space of heaven in the same view of the universe
which hitherto had been applied only to things upon earth, even though
Bruno did still think of the sensible as soul-like.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the seventeenth century there appeared Johann Scheffler, called
ANGELUS SILESIUS (1624-1677), a personality in whom there once
more shone forth, in mighty harmony of soul, what Tauler, Weigel,
Jacob Boehme, and others, had prepared. Gathered, as it were, into
a spiritual focus and shining with enhanced light-giving power,
the ideas of the thinkers named make their appearance in his book:
“Cherubinischer Wandersmann. Geistreiche Sinn- und Schlussreime.” And
everything that Angelus Silesius utters appears as such an immediate,
inevitable, natural revelation of his personality, that it is as though
this man had been called by a special providence to embody wisdom in
a personal form. The simple, matter-of-course way in which he lives
wisdom, attains its expression by being set forth in sayings which,
even in respect of their art and their form, are worthy of admiration.
He hovers like some spiritual being over all earthly existence; and
what he says is like the breath of another world, freed beforehand from
all that is gross and impure, wherefrom human wisdom generally only
toilsomely works itself free.

He only is truly a knower, in the sense of Angelus Silesius, who
brings the eye of the All to vision in himself; he alone sees his
action in the true light who feels that this action is wrought in
him by the hand of the All: “God is in me the fire, and I in him the
light; are we not in most intimate communion one with another?”--“I
am as rich as God; there can be no grain of dust that I--believe me,
man,--have not in common with Him.”--“God loves me above Himself; if
I love Him above myself: I so give Him as much as He gives me from
Himself.”--“The bird flies in the air, the stone rests on the earth;
in water lives the fish, my spirit in God’s own hand.”--“Art thou born
of God, then bloometh God in thee; and His Godhead is thy sap and thy
adornment.”--“Halt! whither runnest thou? Heaven is in thee: seekest
thou God otherwhere, thou missest Him ever and ever.”

For one who thus feels himself in the All, every separation ceases
between self and another being; he no longer feels himself as a single
individual; rather does he feel all that there is of him as a part of
the world, his own proper being, indeed, as that World-Whole itself.
“The world, it holds thee not; thou art thyself the world that holds
thee, in thee, with thee, so strongly captive bound.”--“Man has never
perfect bliss before that unity has swallowed up other-ness.”--“Man is
all things; if aught is lacking to him, then in truth he knoweth not
his own riches.”

As a sense-being, man is a thing among other things, and his
sense-organs bring to him, as a sensible individuality, sense-news of
the things in space and time outside of him; but when Spirit speaks in
man, then there remains no without and no within; nothing is here and
nothing is there that is spiritual; nothing is earlier and nothing
is later; space and time have vanished in the contemplation of the
All-Spirit. Only so long as man looks forth as an individual, is he
here and the thing there; and only so long as he looks forth as an
individual, is this earlier, and this later. “Man, if thou swingest
thy spirit over time and place, so each moment canst thou be in
eternity.”--“I am myself eternity when I leave time behind, and self in
God and God in self together grasp.”--“The rose that here thine outer
eye doth see, it so hath bloomed in God from all eternity.”--“In centre
set thyself, so see’st thou all at once: what then and now occurred,
here and in heaven’s realm.”--“So long for thee, my friend, in mind
lies place and time: so long graspest thou not what’s God, nor what
eternity.”--“When man from manifoldness withdraws, and inward turns
to God, so cometh he to unity.” The summit has thus been climbed,
whereon man steps forth beyond his individual “I” and abolishes every
opposition between the world and himself. A higher life begins for him.
The inner experience that comes over him appears to him as the death
of the old and a resurrection in a new life. “When thou dost raise
thyself above thyself and lettest God o’errule; then in thy spirit
happens ascension into heaven.”--“The body in the spirit must arise,
the spirit, too, in God: if thou in him, my man, will live for ever
blessed.”--“So much mine ‘I’ in me doth ’minish and decrease; so much
therefore to power cometh the Lord’s own ‘I.’”

From such a point of view, man recognises his meaning and the meaning
of all things in the realm of eternal necessity. The natural All
appears to him immediately as the Divine Spirit. The thought of a
divine All-Spirit, who could still have being and sub-existence over
and beside the things of the world, vanishes away as a superseded
conception. This All-Spirit appears so outpoured into things, so
becomes one in being with the things, that it could no longer be
thought at all, if even one single member were thought away from its
being. “Naught is but I and thou; and if we twain were not; then is
God no more God, and heaven falleth in.”--Man feels himself as a
necessary link in the world-chain. His doing has no longer aught of
arbitrariness or of individuality in it. What he does is necessary in
the whole, in the world-chain, which would fall to pieces if this his
doing were to fall out from it. “God may not make without me a single
little worm: if I with him uphold it not, straightway must it burst
asunder.”--“I know that without me God can no moment live: if I come to
naught, he needs must give up the ghost.”--Upon this height, man for
the first time sees things in their real being. He no longer needs to
ascribe from outside to the smallest thing, to the grossly sensible,
a spiritual entity. For just as this minutest thing is, in all its
smallness and gross sensibility, it is a link in the Whole. “No grain
of dust is so vile, no mote can be so small: the wise man seeth God
most gloriously therein.”--“In a mustard seed, if thou wilt understand
it, is the image of all things above and beneath.”

Man feels himself free upon this height. For constraint is there only
where a thing can constrain from without. But when all that is without
has flowed into the within, when the opposition between “I and world,”
“Without and Within,” “Nature and Spirit,” has disappeared, man then
feels all that impels him as his own impulse. “Shut me, as strongly
as thou wilt, in a thousand irons: I still will be quite free and
unfettered.”--“So far as my will is dead, so far must God do what I
will; I myself prescribe to him the pattern and the goal.”--At this
point cease all moral obligations, coming from without: man becomes to
himself measure and goal. He is subject to no law; for the law, too,
has become his being. “For the wicked is the law; were there no command
written, still would the pious love God and their neighbour.”

Thus, on the higher level of knowledge, the innocence of Nature is
given back to man. He fulfils the tasks that are set him in the
feeling of an external necessity. He says to himself: Through this iron
necessity it is given into thy hand to withdraw from this very iron
necessity the link which has been allotted to thee. “Ye men, learn but
from the meadow flower: how ye shall please God and be beautiful as
well.”--“The rose exists without why and because, she blooms because
she blooms; she takes no heed of herself, asks not if men see her.” The
man who has arisen upon the higher level feels in himself the eternal,
necessary pressure of the All, as does the meadow flower; he acts,
as the meadow flower blooms. The feeling of his moral responsibility
grows in all his doing into the immeasurable. For that which he does
not do is withdrawn from the All, is a slaying of that All, so far as
the possibility of such a slaying lies with him. “What is it, not to
sin? Thou need’st not question long: go, the dumb flowers will tell it
thee.”--“All must be slain. If thou slayest not thyself for God, then
at last eternal death shall slay thee for the enemy.”




                               AFTERWORD

Nearly two and a half centuries have passed since Angelus Silesius
gathered up the profound wisdom of his predecessors in his _Cherubinean
Wanderer_. These centuries have brought rich insights into Nature.
Goethe opened a vast perspective to natural science. He sought to
follow up the eternal, unchangeable laws of Nature’s working, to that
summit where, with like necessity, they cause man to come into being,
just as on a lower level they bring forth the stone.[21] Lamarck,
Darwin, Haeckel, and others, have laboured further in the direction
of this way of conceiving things. The “question of all questions,”
that in regard to the natural origin of man, found its answer in the
nineteenth century; and other related problems in the realm of natural
events have also found their solutions. To-day men comprehend that it
is not necessary to step outside of the realm of the actual and the
sensible in order to understand the serial succession of beings, right
up to man, in its development in a purely natural manner.

  [21] Cp. my book: _Goethe’s Weltanschauung_, Weimar, 1897.

And, further, J. G. Fichte’s penetration has thrown light into the
being of the human ego, and shown the soul of man where to seek itself
and what it is.[22] Hegel has extended the realm of thought over all
the provinces of being, and striven to grasp in thought the entire
sensible existence of Nature, as also the loftiest creations of the
human spirit.[23]

  [22] Cp. ante, and the section upon Fichte in my book: _Welt- und
  Lebensanschauungen im neunzehnten Jahrhundert_, vol. i., Berlin, S.
  Cronbach.

  [23] Cp. my presentation of Hegel in _Welt- und Lebensanschauungen
  im neunzehnten Jahrhundert_, vol. i.

How, then, do those men of genius whose thoughts have been traced in
the preceding pages, appear in the light of a world-conception which
takes into account the scientific achievements of the centuries that
followed their epoch? They still believed in a “supernatural” story of
creation. How do their thoughts appear when confronted with a “natural”
history of creation, which the science of the nineteenth century has
built up?

This natural science has given to Nature naught that did not belong
to her; it has only taken from her what did not belong to her. It has
banished from Nature all that is not to be sought in her, but is to be
found only in man’s inner being. It sees no longer any being in Nature
that is like unto the human soul, and that creates after the manner of
man. It no longer makes the organic forms to be created by a man-like
God; it follows up their development in the sense-world according to
purely natural laws. Meister Eckhart, as well as Tauler, and also Jacob
Boehme with Angelus Silesius, would needs feel the deepest satisfaction
in contemplating this natural science. The spirit in which they desired
to behold the world has passed over in the fullest sense to this view
of Nature, when it is rightly understood. What they were still unable
to do, _viz._: to bring the facts of Nature themselves into the light
which had risen for them, that, undoubtedly, would have been their
longing, if this same natural science had been laid before them. They
could not do it; for no geology, no “natural history of creation” told
them about the processes in Nature. The Bible alone told them in its
own way about such processes. Therefore they sought, so far as they
could, for the spiritual where alone it is to be found: in the inner
nature of man.

At the present time, they would have quite other aids at hand than
in their own time, to show that an actually existing Spirit is to be
found only in man. They would to-day agree unreservedly with those who
seek Spirit as a fact not in the root of Nature, but in her fruit.
They would admit that Spirit as perceivable is a result of evolution,
and that upon lower levels of evolution such Spirit must not be sought
for. They would understand that no “creative thought” ruled in the
forthcoming of the Spirit in the organism, any more than such a
“creative thought” caused the ape to evolve from the marsupials.

Our present age cannot speak about the facts of Nature as Jacob Boehme
spoke of them. But there exists a point of view, even in this present
day, which brings Jacob Boehme’s way of regarding things near to a view
of the world that takes account of modern natural science. There is no
need to lose the Spirit, when one finds in Nature only the natural.
Many do, indeed, believe to-day that one must needs lose oneself in
a shallow and prosaic materialism, if one simply accepts the “facts”
which natural science has discovered. I myself stand fully upon the
ground of this same natural science. I have, through and through, the
feeling that, in a view of Nature such as Ernst Haeckel’s, only he can
lose himself amid shallows who himself approaches it with a shallow
thought-world. I feel something higher, more glorious, when I let the
revelations of the “natural history of creation” work upon me, than
when the supernatural miracle stories of the confessions of faith force
themselves upon me. In no “holy book” do I know aught that unveils for
me anything as lofty as the “sober” fact, that every human germ in
the mother’s womb repeats in brief, one after the other, those animal
types which its animal ancestors have passed through. If only we fill
our hearts with the glory of the facts that our senses behold, then
we shall have little left over for “wonders” which do not lie in the
course of Nature. If we experience the Spirit in ourselves, then we
have no need of such in external Nature.

In my _Philosophy of Freedom_, (Berlin, 1894) I have described my
view of the world, which has no thought of driving out the Spirit,
because it beholds Nature as Darwin and Haeckel beheld her. A plant,
an animal, gains nothing for me if I people it with souls of which my
senses give me no information. I do not seek in the external world for
a “deeper,” “more soulful” being of things; nay, I do not even assume
it, because I believe that the insight which shines forth for me in
my inner being guards me against it. I believe that the things of
the sense-world are, in fact, just as they present themselves to us,
because I see that a right self-knowledge leads us to this: that in
Nature we should seek nothing but natural processes. I seek no Spirit
of God in Nature, because I believe that I perceive the nature of the
human spirit in myself. I calmly admit my animal ancestry, because I
believe myself to know that there, where these animal ancestors have
their origin, no spirit of like nature with soul can work. I can only
agree with Ernst Haeckel when he prefers the “eternal rest of the
grave” to an immortality such as is taught by some religions.[24] For I
find a dishonouring of Spirit, an ugly sin against the Spirit, in the
conception of a soul continuing to exist after the manner of a sensible
being.

  [24] Cp. Haeckel’s _Riddle of the Universe_.

I hear a shrill discord when the scientific facts in Haeckel’s
presentation come up against the “piety” of the confessions of some
of our contemporaries. But for me there rings out from confessions of
faith, which give a discord with natural facts, naught of the spirit
of the higher piety which I find in Jacob Boehme and Angelus Silesius.
This higher piety stands far more in full harmony with the working
of the natural. There lies no contradiction in the fact of saturating
oneself with the knowledge of the most recent natural science, and at
the same time treading the path which Jacob Boehme and Angelus Silesius
have sought. He who enters on that path in the sense of those thinkers
has no need to fear losing himself in a shallow materialism when he
lets the secrets of Nature be laid before him by a “natural history
of creation.” Whoever has grasped my thoughts in this sense will
understand with me in like manner the last saying of the _Cherubinean
Wanderer_, with which also this book shall close: “Friend, it is even
enough. In case thou more wilt read, go forth, and thyself become the
book, thyself the reading.”

                                THE END




TRANSCRIBERS’ NOTES

All obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected, while
original spellings and inconsistent hyphenation have been preserved to
maintain the authenticity of the original text.

In the text version of this book, underscores were used to indicate
a word originally printed in _italics_. All words/phrases originally
printed as small caps have been converted to capital letters.

The following changes have been implemented to improve the clarity and
flow of the text:

  Page 105: “uncreate” changed to “uncreated”: _but he must look forward
  upon the uncreated: his knowledge must be a beginning_

  Page 155: “less” changed to “lesser”: _To a greater or lesser extent
  this illumination_

  Page 173: “of” added: _I should in reality and in truth be trying to
  think of something not unlike_

  Page 181: “to” added: _which leads back once more to the knowledge_

  Page 254: “of” added: _Instead of thinking of the Root-Being of the
  world as Spirit_

The chapter headings have been synchronized with the Table of Contents
for consistency.

New original cover art included with this eBook is granted to the
public domain.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MYSTICS OF THE RENAISSANCE AND THEIR RELATION TO MODERN THOUGHT, INCLUDING MEISTER ECKHART, TAULER, PARACELSUS, JACOB BOEHME, GIORDANO BRUNO, AND OTHERS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


